
Notes and quotes from The King of Infinite Space, Euclid and His Elements by David Berlinski, 2013.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Chapter I - Signs of Men
The propositions in Books I through IV are concerned with points, straight lines, circles, squares, right
angles, triangles, and rectangles, the stable shapes of art and architecture.  Books V through IX develop
a theory of magnitudes, proportions, and numbers.  The remaining books are devoted to solid geometry.  Every
book of the *Elements* is compelling, but the Euclid of myth and memory is the Euclid of the first four books
of his treatise.
- p. 7.  [Emphasis in original as italics.]

Chapter III - Common Beliefs
There are five common notions in all:
1. Things that are equal to the same thing are also equal to one another.
2. If equals be added to equals, the wholes are equal.
3. If equals be subtracted from equals, the remainders are equal.
4. Things that coincide with one another are equal to one another.
5. The whole is greater than the part.
- p. 21.

Chapter IV - Darker by Definition
The *Elements* contains twenty-three definition, of these, the first seven, and the twenty-third, are fundamental:
1. A point is that which has no part
2. A line is length without breadth.
3. The extremities of a line are points
4. A straight line is a line which lies evenly with the points on itself.
5. A surface is that which has length and breadth only.
6. The extremeties of a surface are lines.
7. A plane surface is a surface which lies evenly with the straight lines on itself.
[page break]
23. Parallel straight lines are straight lines which, being in the same plane and being produced indefinitely in
  both directions, do not meet one another in either direction.
- pp. 33-34.  [Emphasis in original as italics.]

The surface of a sphere is unbounded but not infinite, and a line of fractions narrowing to zero is infinite but
not unbounded.
- p. 38.

Parmenides drew the conclusion that there is no void between atoms, because it makes no sense to say of a void that it *is.*
- p. 42.  [Emphasis in original as italics.]

Chapter V - The Axioms
The first three of Euclid's axioms are commonly grouped together.  "Let the following be postulated," Euclid writes:
1. To draw a straight line from any point to any point.
2. To produce a finite straight line continuously in a straight line.
3. To describe a circle with any center and distance.
- p. 46.

Euclid's fourth axiom asserts that
4. All right angles are equal.
- p. 50.

The fifth and final axiom of Euclid's system is more famous than the other four.  It is said to have troubled Euclid,
who squirmed and turned, wheezed and whistled, before accepting it:
5. If a straight line falling on two straight lines makes the interior angles on the same side less than two right angles,
the two straight lines, if produced indefinitely, meet on the side on which are the angles less tahn two right angles.
- p. 53.

Chapter VI - The Greater Euclid
[Quote preceding and leading into the chapter.]
Si les triangles faisaient un dieu, ils lui donneraient troi cotes (If triangles had a god, they would give him three sides).
  - Voltaire
- p. 57.

Chapter VII - Visible and Invisible Proof
[One of two quotes preceding and leading into the chapter.]
Some paint comes across directly onto the nervous system and other paint tells you the story in a long diatribe through the brain.
  - Francis Bacon
- p. 77.

It is in the rich and fascinating interplay between the logical structure of his theorems and their brilliantly contrived
illustrations that Euclid's art comes most alive.
Yes, *alive;* yes, *art.*
- p. 80.  [Emphasis in original as italics.]

The purpose of a proof is to compel belief, and to compel his reader's belief, Euclid has invested his twenty-seventh proposition
with pictorial life.  His diagram and the logical structure of the theorem it expresses undergo fusion.  Far more than the
axiomatic method alone, it is this fusion that is at the heart of Euclid's method.
- p. 87.

The propositions that Euclid demonstrated in the *Elements* ascend by number, and the numbers are a reasonable guide to their
difficulty.
- p. 89.  [Emphasis in original as italics.]

Chapter VIII - The Devil's Offer
[Quote preceding and leading into the chapter.]
Algebra is the offer made by the devil to the mathematician.  The devil says: "I will give you this powerful machine, it will answer
any question you like.  All you need to do is give me your soul: give up geometry and you will have this marvelous machine."
  - Michael Atiyah
- p. 91.

[This quote demonstrates a big reason I did not like this book very much: the author's metaphors are a bit too cutsie and over the
top sometimes -- at least for my tastes.  Too often they feel unnecessary and are present only to show off how clever the author
thinks he is.]
The numbers are expressed as a ratio because two equations a0 * x + b0 * y + c0 = 0 and a1 * x + b1 * y + c1 = 0 define -- they
*are* -- one and the same straight line if the numbers a, b, and c are proportional.  In this way, Hilbert has offered an
interpretation of the undefined terms of Euclidean geometry in terms of the defined elements of a real ordered field.  He has
gotten one theory to speak in another theory's voice.
It's like hearing a cat bark.
- p. 113.  [Emphasis in original as italics.]

