
During the two recessions in the first decade of the 2000s I found myself wishing I could diversify my employment so that during downturns I might make less, but still be busy and have something coming in.  Dependent on W-2 type jobs since the 1970s, I was not up to the task of figuring out how to do this, so  I muddled through until the economy improved.
As a recent graduate ready to embark on a career in journalism in 2001, Dorie Clark lost her job on 9/11 and did not have the luxury of "muddling through."  Today, after years of figuring out how to have multiple resilient sources of income, one of the things she has diversified into is selling books describing how to diversify.
<i><u>Entrepreneurial You</u></i> is Dorie Clark's third and most recent book on this topic.  Her books, along with those by a few others, are serving as my roadmaps for continuing to work despite being over 60 - and well past the age where I will get anything remotely resembling a fair shake in the today's bigoted corporate world.
And of those books, Dorie's <i><u>Entrepreneurial You</u></i> is one of the best.  This is because she gives some gentle encouragement, which is pretty easy to find, along with specific ideas steps for setting and attaining goals - which, as far as I can tell, is quite rare.
A list of the chapters serving as the core of the book can serve as an overview of all the ways to diversify one's career in today's online marketplace.

Chapter 4: Become a Coach or Consultant
Chapter 5: Build a Speaking Practice
Chapter 6: Build a Following Through Podcasting
Chapter 7: Develop Your Audience by Blogging and Vlogging
Chapter 8: Bring Your Followers Together
Chapter 9: Leverage Your Platform by Creating an Online Course
Chapter 10: Create Digital Products and Online Communities
Chapter 11: Leverage Intellectual Property - Affiliate Marketing and Joint Ventures

Dorie writes in language that is clear and plain, and her books are heavy on substance.  I am currently working on writing ebooks, and learning how accomplishing the tasks in just one of the sections in Chapter 10 can take over a year.  Tech companies may turn up their noses at my grey hair but the determination, attention to detail, perseverance, and myriad other "soft" skills I learned from years of coding serves me well in this part of my new life and its ventures and adventures.

If you enjoy working, take pride in a job well done, and are tired of the commoditization of work and being stifled in a corporate job - all while "the man" rakes in his share for just for sitting back and watching you sweat, check out this book!

Most work-from-home deals and make money online schemes are click-bait for the lazy and gullible.  Dorie's books are the real deal, but warning: to reap the benefits requires a lot of work.  That's ok, I for one <i>love my job!</i>
