
Quotes from Because Internet, Understanding the New Rules of Language, by Gretchen McCulloch, 2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Ch. 1 Informal Writing, pp. 1-16.
You never truly step into the same English twice.  When future historians look back on this era, they'll find
 our changes just as fascinating as we now find innovative words from Shakespeare or Latin or Norman French.
 - p. 15.

Ch. 2 Language and Society, pp. 17-62.
But every generation has talked slightly differently from its parents: otherwise, we'd all still be talking
like Shakespeare.
 - p. 30.

Research in other centuries, languages, and regions continues to find that women lead linguistic change, in dozens
of specific changes in specific cities and regions.  Young women are also consistently on the bleeding edge of those
linguistic changes that periodically sweep through media trend sections, from uptalk (the distinctive rising intonation
at the end of sentences?) to the use of "like" to introduce a quotation ("And I was like, 'Innovation'").  The role
that young women play as language disruptors is so clearly established at this point it's practially boring to linguists
who study this topic: well-known sociolinguist William Labov estimated that women lead to 90 percent of linguistic
change in a paper he wrote in 1990....  Men tend to follow a generation later: in other words, women tend to learn
language from their peers; men learn it from their mothers.
 - p. 34.

The internet, then, makes language change faster because it leads to more weak ties: you can remain aware of people who
you don't see anymore, and you can get to know people who you never would have met otherwise....  It's not an accident
that Twitter, where you're encouraged to follow people you do't already know, has given rise to more linguistic innovation
(not to mention memes and social movements) than Facebook, where you primarily friend people you alread know offline.
 - p. 39.

Ch. 3 Internet People, pp. 63-108.
Internet slang like acronyms and emoticons is not just unfamiliar to them, it signals membership in a group that they have
no desire to be a part of.  To put it in the words of an older person who talked to me after using Facebook for a year or
so, "I keep seeing people writing a colon then a parenthesis....  What do they mean by that?"  But even after I explained
("Oh, that's rather clever!), I have never once seen this person use a smiley.
 - p. 95.

What these profiles [articles about teens and social media] inevitably find is that popular teenagers are texting or snapping
or other-kind-of-messaging each other, for seemingly no reason, at rates completely unfathomable to the adult writer.
Thousands of texts a month!  Running up data bills!  If they dig a little deeper, they may also find that shyer, nerdier, or
more introverted teens are doing less of all this.
 - p. 101.

By joining the social internet after their parents were already there, they faced an especially dire version of "context
collapse."  This is danah boyd's [lowercase sic] term for when people from all your opverlapping friend groups see all your
shared posts from different aspects of your life....  For young people, context collapse is a collective problem: they need
space to figure out who they are, where they aren't being constantly supervised by authority figures.
 - p. 103.

Some statements are direct, others wrap their meaning in layers.  Including "lol" indicates there's a second layer of meaning
to be found, telling the recipient to look beyond the literal words you're saying.
 - p. 105.

Ch. 4 Typographical Tone of Voice, pp. 109-154.
The passive-aggressive potential of the single period started being reported in thinkpieces in 2013, in a list of *New York*
magazine and then later the same year as a full article in the *New Republic*, before popping up in a handful of other
publications in subsequent years....  Despite the fears mongered by headlines, it's not the case that the passive-aggressive
meaning has completely killed all other uses of the period.
 - p. 113. [* = emphasis in original as italics.]

So how is a person to tell whether a given period is supposed to [page break] be passive-aggresive, sad, or merely formal?
 - pp. 113-114.

Just as a question mark can indicate a rising intonation even without a question (Like so?), the period can indicate a falling
intonation even when it's not serving to end a statement (Like. So.)....  But in an ordinary conversation, we don't speak in
full sentences, and we especially don't round them all off with a distinct fall....  Instead we speak in utterances, and our
intonation is neither rising nor falling: by default, it's flat or trailing off, like a dot dot dot or an unpunctuated linebreak.
 - p. 114.

Before that [the middle ages], ancient Greek and Roman writing had all the formatting of a wordsearch puzzle grid, with no
punctuation, paragraphs, or even spaces between words, in all caps (carvings) or lowercase (ink).
 - p. 114.

In other words, people who were more fluent at typing used their increased facility to be more polite, just as polite as they
would have been while talking.
 - p. 122.

Research on politeness in internet communities finds that many elements of it mirror politeness offline.  It's well established
that politeness decreases with power -- you're more polite to your boss than to your underling....  Just like offline power
relationships, the more powerful Wikipedia administrators and those with a high "karma" rating on Stack Exchange tended to be
less polite than regular users.
 - p. 123.

Sarcasm, online as well as off, involves saying the opposite of what you mean in a way that still conveys your true opinion:
"Well, isn't that just terrific!" in response to bad news, or "Thanks, Sherlock!" in response to a very obvious deduction.
 - p. 133.

People noticed this problem long before the internet, and many had attempted to remedy it, a history chronicled in the book
*Shady Characters* by Keith Houston.  There was Henry Denham, a British printer who used a mirrored question mark to distinguish
rhetorical questions in 1575, and John Wilkins, a British natural philosopher, who proposed an inverted exclamation mark to
indicate irony in 1668.
 - p. 133. [* = emphasis in original as italics.]

Mock </sarcasm> code or #sarcasm hashtags require no explanation, fee, or font installation, and have indeed caught on to some
extent, but both can be a trifle obvious.  After all, the point of sarcasm is the double meaning, the innuendo, the sous-entendu.
 - p. 134.

More intriguingly, the tilde might have been helped by its visual resemblance to a particular type of sarcastic inflection....
So I tried to pin it down more specifically, and nearly fell off my chair in excitement when it dawned on me: when you say a
word like "sooooo" with a sing-song sarcastic inflection, the pitch of your voice literally rises, then falls, then rises slightly
again.  In other words, your intonation makes the shape of a tilde.
 - p. 138.

In theory, sparkle sarcasm [~*~ before and after the sarcastic phrase] has as many possible typographical variations as sparkle
enthusiasm [~~~~~~~~********~~~~~~~~ or ~*~*~*~].  But in practice, it tends to veer more towards the subdued side: a pair of
~tildes~, perhaps up to a sparkle emoji or ~*asterisk plus tilde*~, but [page break] often simply an initial ~tilde.  There may
not be quite as much space for ~*~*true sparkle exuberance*~*~ in deadpan snark.
 - pp. 138-139.

A still more deadpan kind of irony is created in the lack of punctuation and capitalization altogether, what I call minimalist
typography.
 - p. 139.

Trend pieces about passive-aggressive texting started around 2013 and really got going in 2015 and 2016.  These pieces pointed out
that this same minimalist typography was liable to make your friends wonder why you're mad at them.  Typing in lowercase was no
longer an issue of laziness or efficiency: it became a way of indicating attitude.
 - p. 141.

A predictive keyboard automatically adds capitals at the beginning of messages and after a period, and it only predicts words in
its dictionary.  Suddenly, instead of lowercasing taking less effort, it often took more....  In the words of Dolly Parton, "It
costs a lot of money to look this cheap."
 - p. 141.

I replied, without thinking too much about it, "my Brand is Strong" -- a few people acknowledged the humor, and that was that.
 - p. 147.

Later, I got to thinking about it.  I realized that I'd replied from my phone, but I'd had to go to extra effort in order to do so.
If I hadn't been able to override my phone's default formatting -- if I'd had to type "My brand is strong" rather than "my Brand is
Strong" -- my irony could have been read as sincere arrogance.
 - p. 147.

Irony is a linguistic trust fall.  When I write or speak with a double meaning, I fall backwards, hoping that you'll be there to
catch me.  The risks are high....  But the rewards are high, too....
 - p. 148.

If polite typography, as we saw earlier, is about making extra effort, using initial capitals and friendly exclamation marks to
signal cheerful distance or genuine enthusiasm, then ironic typography is the opposite on both counts: it introduces a note of
dissonance that makes the reader look harder to find the double meaning.  Any variation from an expected baseline will do, whether
that's lowercasing, sparkle sarcasm, asking a rhetorical question by omitting the question mark, or ironically using outdated slang
(one much-reblogged post on Tumblr noted that saying something is "great" indicates it's genuinely good, whereas something that's
described as "gr8" is guilty pleasure or appreciated sarcastically).  But crucially, irony requires this baseline in the first
place.  It required us to develop a set of typographically resources for indicating straightforward types of voices, like shouting
and enthusiasm, before we could creatively subvert them.
 - p. 149.

But the expanded system of conveying emotional nuance through text we've come up with instead [of that used with handwriting] is
so nuanced and idiosyncratic that if I'm typing a personal sort of communication for someone -- say, when I'm in the passenger's
seat and a text on the driver's phone needs to be replied to right away -- I find I need to inquire in great detail how exactly
they want me to type.  Period, exclamation mark, or simple linebreak at the end of the utterance?  Likewise, if I receive a message
authored by someone other than the owner of the phone, I can often tell the difference.  Expressive typography makes electronic
communication anything but impersonal.
 - p. 153.

I, for one, think this change is fantastic.  Even if this increased attention to typographical tone of voice did mean the decline
of standard punctuation, I'd gladly accept the decline of standards that were arbitrary and elitist in the first place in favor of
being able to connect with my fellow humans.
 - p. 153.

Ch. 5 Emoji and Other Internet Gestures, pp. 155-196.
I was just as fascinated as anyone by emoji as a phenomenon, but linguists have a definition of what language is, and it's very
clear that emoji don't fit in it.
 - p. 157.

The eggplant emoji is a prime example: widely used as a phallic symbol, it's a natural heir to the obscene gesture list above.
 - p. 162.

The most engaging gifs have been found to be those with faces in them, a feature that's come to be reflected in user interfaces.
 - p. 164.

It's not an accident that the most iconic popcorn.gif is one of Michael Jackson.  Both gestural and digital emblems participate in
cycles of appropriation from African American culture: the high five came from a Jazz Age gesture known as the low five or "giving
skin" and spread via sports teams, and the fistbump came from the "dap" [page break] among black soldiers during the Vietnam war.
 - pp. 164-165.

If you try talking with your hands tied down (recruit a friend to make sure you get untied!), you'll probably have a hard time with
it.  Researchers have done this: they showed people cartoons of Wile E. Coyote chasing Road Runner and asked them to describe them
to someone else.
 - p. 165.

Just like gestures and facial expressions fit seamlessly with spoken words, punctuation-based emoticons can directly accompany typed
words.
 - p. 178.

The nose fell out of favor among younger people: in 2011, a study of emoticons on Twitter by linguist Tyler Schnoebelen found that
noseful emoticons were used by people who also tended to tweet to celebrities like Pepe Aguilar, Ashton Kutcher, and Jennifer Lopez,
whereas those who tweeted noseless emoticons tended to tweet to Justin Bieber, Miley Cyrus, the Jonas Brothers, and Selena Gomez.
 - p. 178.

Emoji and all of their relatives are fake by definition.  If we try to say that they map directly onto our emotion facial expressions,
then we have a weird mismatch.  How is it that we're so keen on such disingenuous symbols?  What's to enjoy about a world where
everyone is wearing a mask?
 - p. 185.

Liking can also backfire: the "deep like" refers to a possibly accidental like on someone's post from a long time ago, which implies
you were creepily looking back through their profile.
 - p. 189.

We already had a way of representing individual sounds, in the form of letters, and we've been developing the system for representing
tone of voice using our existing punctuation and capitalization that we talked about in a previous chapter.  So emoji and other
pictorial elements are filling the third important pillar of communication: a way of representing our gestures and physical space.
 - p. 192.

Ch. 6 How Conversations Change, pp. 197-236.
These social phrases [e.g., "How's it going?", "What's up?"] are known as phatic expressions, and their meaning is more about the
context you say them in than the sum of their individual words.  "How's it going" and "What's up?" have the same function: they both
acknowledge the presence of someone you already know in a way that's slightly more elaborate than a simple greeting ("Hi!") but doesn't
go so far as to be original conversation.  So their rote answers are also functionally inter-[page break]changeable, as long as you say
them in the seamless manner of someone following a social script.
 - pp. 200-201.

"Hey" as a summoner, as in "hey you," is a word we've had since at least the 1200s, and "hi" is simply a varian on the vowel, dated
back to at least the 1400s.
 - p. 203.

Shifts in greetings are especially noticeable in email.  When we email, we don't facethe total lack of knowledge about who we're
communicating with like the telephone users had.
 - p. 203.

We can read faster than we can speak, and reading also lets us glance back and check something again, which means that writing
naturally supports longer and more complex sentences: if you compare an essay and the transcript of a famous speech, the essay
will have more subordinate clauses, while speech will have more repetition.
 - p. 214.

Topic-based internet communities are third places [like gyms, coffee houses, bars, etc. - home and work are the first two "places"]
in the way that you can join a pottery class or drop by a networking meetup as a third place....  The first people to socialize over
computer networks were united by their dissatisfaction with the offline social options available to them....  But both online and
off, topic-based communities tend to draw people who want to expand their existing friendship circles: there's a reason why joining
a club is classic advice for people moving to a new city.  It's hard to articulate the third-placean appeal of topic-based internet
communities for those who've never been in one.  At least with a pottery class or networking event, you can say you're there to
make a vase or collect some business cards: tangible outcomes even if you're also searching for intangible community.  But for their
online versions, the pretexts wear thinner: Why spend so much time talking to strangers about the *X-Files* or wine tasting when you
could be actually watching the show or drinking the wine?  The social benefits are invisible to people who don't need them.
 - p. 225. [* = emphasis in original as italics.]

I found that the statuses that got the most likes and comments weren't necessarily the ones that were universally applicable or made
the most sense in isolation: say, a simple announcement of a new phone number, which is relevant to all your friends.  Instead,
popular posts tended to strike a balance between somewhat obscure but not too cryptic -- in-jokes and references that appealed
strongly to a distinct subset of people.  One of my most popular posts at the time was in a language that only a handful of my
Facebook friends even understood -- my friends who were taking the same language class.
 - p. 229.

They [Woodrow Hartzog and Frederic D. Stutzman] describe [in a "law paper"] four factors that can lead to obscurity online: first,
whether your post can be found in a search or whether a would-be finder needs to click through an obscure trail of links to find it;
second, whether your post is restricted to certain people (such as by friendship status or a password); third, whether [page break]
you're identifiable by name, pseudonum, or not at all; and fourth, how clearly understandable the post is, even if someone who comes
across it shouldn't.  After all, it doesn't matter so much if a post is technically completely public.  If no one knows it's there,
that you wrote it, or what it means, it's still effectively private through its obscurity.
 - pp. 230-231.

Ch. 7 Memes and Internet Culture, pp. 237-264.
Rather than dive into old Cheezeburger forum posts, let's look a the closest thing lolcat has to a peer-reviewed text: a translation
of the bible into lolspeak.  It was written collaboratively on a wiki, with multiple authors contributing and voting.
 - p. 243.  [This translation is at lolcatbible.com .]

Incoherent language or bad photoshop accomplishes the same thing.  Just as slang or minimalist typography can convey that you're
approachable or invite people to understand your layers of irony, the playful language of many memes provides a clear route to
participation.  Formally constructed cultural items hide the patchwork edits and labor that go into them, making the aspiring author
or artist intimidated by the roughness of their first drafts in comparison to the polish of others' final versions.  Incoherence
does the opposite: the meme as internet folklore is imperfect, constantly under construction, and something you could write, too.
 - p. 260.

Ch. 8 A New Metaphor, pp. 265-274.
To put it in technological terms, language is humanity's most spectacular open source project.
 - p. 267.

