
Notes and quotes from Entrepreneurial You by Dorie Clark, 2017.

[Chapter 1: The Entrepreneurial Opportunity, pp. 3-16.]
Today, I actually earn my living in seven entirely different ways: writing books, speaking,
teaching business school, consulting, executive coaching, online courses, and - since that
a-ha moment from my friend John Corcoran - afficliate income through my email list.  If one
of these avenues goes away, I have enough diversification that I don't have to worry.
 - p. 10.

Chapter 2: First, Become a Trusted Source, pp. 17-40 - Section Titles:
- Create Valuable Online Content
- Write a Book
- Network and Build Social Proof
- Maintain a Connection With Your Audience
- Build Your Email List

Chapter 3: The Courage to Monetize, pp. 43-53

[After three chapters of introductory material, why and how you-can-do-it-type stuff, she
devotes a chapter to each of the following specific income streams.]

Chapter 4: Become a Coach or Consultant
Chapter 5: Build a Speaking Practice
Chapter 6: Build a Following Through Podcasting
Chapter 7: Develop Your Audience by Blogging and Vlogging
Chapter 8: Bring Your Followers Together
Chapter 9: Leverage Your Platform by Creating an Online Course
Chapter 10: Create Digital Products and Online Communities, pp. 175-193.
Chapter 11: Leverage Intellectual Property - Affiliate Marketing and Joint Ventures

[From Chapter 10.]
Another disadvantage to self-publishing is that Amazon has set typical pricing standards for
ebooks; no one really expects to pay more than $10 or $15, at most.  If you want to create
valuable content with premium pricing, you'll need to self-publish (even a simple PDF will
sometimes do) and sell through your own website, using a service like E-Junkie or Gumroad
to process sales.  You'll need to drive traffic on your own, unlike Amazon, where existing
customers may stumble upon your work through a keyword search.  But you'll be able to charge
higher prices, creating the possibility of substantial profit.
 - p. 177.


