
Highlights from the book Permission Marketing, 1999, by Seth Godin.

p. 49: Permission Marketing Is Anticipated, Personal, Relevant
Anticipated - people look forward to hearing from you
Personal - the messages are directly related to the individual.
Relevant - the marketing is about something the prospect is interested in.

p. 65: The Natural Synergy of Permission and One-to-One Marketing
The one-to-one marketer works to change his focus from finding as many new
customers as he can to extracting the maximum valuue from each customer.
The Permission Maketer works to change his focus from finding as many prospects
as he can to converting the largest number of prospects into customers.  Then
he leverages the permission on an ongoing basis.

p. 98: Five Levels of Permission - in order of importance
1. Intravenous - and the 'purchase-on-approval' model
2. Points - liability model and chance model
3. Personal relationships
4. Brand trust
5. Situation
[6. Spam]

p. 122 - Personal Permission
"Personal permission is the most powerful form of permission for making major
shifts in a consumer's behavior....
"Personal permission is also the single easiest way to move someone to an
intravenous level of permission.  It's th best way to sell custom products,
very expensive products, or products that take an enormous amount of learning
to appreciate."

p. 131 - Chaptr 7: Working With Permission as a Commodity
"These four rules go a long way to help marketers understand permission:
1. Permission is nontransferable.
2. Permission is selfish.
3. Permission is a process, not a moment.
4. Permission can be canceled at any time."

p. 149 - The Most Popular Myths About Marketing on the Web.
1. Traffic (Hits!) Is the Best Way to Measure a Web Site
- Goal is conversions
2. If You Build Great Content, People Will Return Over and Over
- People won't come back unless you remind them to
3. You Can Sell Stuff on the Web If You Invest Enough in a Secure Server
- It's more than just technology, it's sales
4. The Search Engines are the Key to Traffic to Your Site
- Any site is just a needle in a haystack - must have a plan
5. You Need Java and Shockwave to Be at the Cutting Edge
- If your site makes people feel stupid, it will fail
6. The Web Is Like Tv
- It is a poor substitute for tv
7. Lots of People Surf the Web
- There is actually a lot of activity by just a few people
8. If You Don't Experiment Now, You'll Lose Later
9. Your Site Should Be a Complete Online Experience
10. Anonymity Is Good for the Net
- People in masks are rarely good citizens, and they virutally never buy anything
11. You Can Make Money Selling Banners
- No, you can't
12. Activity Is Good

p. 155 Chapter 9: Permission Marketing in the Context of the Web
"The internet is the greatest direct marketing medium ever invented."
p. 156 - "Here are the six of the biggest benefits it offers to direct marketers:
1. Stamps are free
2. Speed of testing 100x faster
3. Response rates 15x higher
4. Curriculum marketing - in text and on web
5. Frequency is free - talk to individuals over and over
6. Printing is free

p. 162 - Four Keys to Setting Up Your Permission-Based Web Site
1. Test and Optimize Your Offer
2. Make the Permission Overt and Clear
3. Use Computers, not People, to Send and Receive Information
4. Focus on Mastery - Online Consumers Need to Feel Smart

p. 211 Chapter 11: How to Evaluate a Permission Marketing Program
1. What's the bait?
2. What does an incremental permission cost?
3. Giw deep is the permission that is granted?
4. How much does incremental frequency cost?
5. What's the acive response rate to communications?
6. What are the issues regarding compression?
7. Is the company treating the permission as an asset?
8. How is the permission being leveraged?
9. How is the permission level being increased?
10. What is the expected lifetime of one permission?

