
Highlights from the book Tribes, We Need You to Lead Us, 2008, by Seth Godin.

Three things have happened, pretty much at the same time.  All three point to the
same (temporarily uncomfortable, but ultimately marvelous) outcome:
1. Many people are starting to realize that they work a lot and that working on
stuff they believe in (and making things happen) is much more satisfying than
just getting a paycheck and waiting to get fired (or die).
2. Many organizations have discovered that the factory-centric model of producing
goods and services is not nearly as profitable as it used to be.
3. Many consumers have decided to spend their money buying things that aren't
factory-produced commodities.  And they've decided not to spend their time
embracing off-the-shelf ideas.  Consumers have decided, instead, to spend time
and money on fashion, on stories, on things that matter, and on things they
believe in.
 - pp. 9-10.

Leaders have followers.  Managers have employees.
Managers make widgets.  Leaders make change.
 - p. 14.

The Grateful Dead ... and Jack [Section Title!!]
------------------------------
It's worth taking a second to think about what it really means to be a tribe.

In *Permission Marketing,* I wrote about how marketers must earn the right to
deliver anticipated, persona., and relevant messages that go from the marketer
or the leader to the tribe, there are the messages that go sideways, from member
to member, and back to the leader as well.

The Grateful Dead understood this.  They created concerts to allow people not
just to hear their music, but to hear it *together.*  That's where the tribe
part comes in.

I just heard about Jack, an "occasional restaurant" run by Danielle Sucher and
Dave Turner in Brooklyn.  They open the restaraunt only about twenty times a
year, on Saturday nights.  By appointment.  Go online and you can see the menu
in advance.  Then, you book and pay if you want to go.
 - p. 21.

So a leader can help increase the effectiveness of the tribe and its members by:
- transforming the shared interest into a passionate goal and desire for change;
- providing tools to allow members to tighten their communications; and
- leveraging the tribe to allow it to grow and gain new members.
Most leaders focus only on the third tactic.  A bigger tribe somehow equals a
better tribe.  In fact. the first two tactics almost always lead to more impact.
Every action you take as a leader can affect these three elements, and the
challenge is to figure out which one to maximize.
 - p. 25.

An individual artist needs only a thousand true fans in her tribe.  It's enough.
 - p. 33.

A fundamentalist is a person who considers whether a fact is acceptable to his
religion before he explores it.
As opposed to a curious person who explores first and then considers whether or
not he wats to accept the ramifications.
A curious person embraces the tension between his religion and something new,
wrestles with it and through it, and then decides whether to embrace the new
idea or reject it.
 - p. 63.

You're not going to be able to grow your careen or your business or feed the
tribe by going after *most people.*  Most people are really good at ignoring new
trends or great employees or big ideas.
 - p. 68, emphasis in original.

The art of leadership is understanding what you can't compromise on.
 - p. 79.

Switching Religions Without Giving up Faith
A recent study by the Pew Research Center for the People and the Press found that
about a third of all Americans have left the religions they grew up with.  The
study mistakenly uses the word *faith,* but in fact, few of these people have
lost faith.  What they've done instead is change the system they use for
reinforcing that faith.
When you fall in love with the system, you lose the ability to grow.
Faith Is What You Do
If religion comprises the rules you follow, faith is demonstrated by the actions
you take.
 - p. 83, emphasis in original.

Instead of wondering when your next vacation is, maybe you ought to set up a life
you don't need to escape from.
 - p. 101.

The key elements in creating a micromovement consist of of five things to do and
six principles.
1. Publish a manifesto.
2. Make it easy for your followers to connect with you.
3. Make it easy for your followers to connect with one another.
4. Realize that money is not the point of movement.
5. Track your progress.
Principles:
1. Transparency really is your only option.
2. Your movement needs to be bigger than you.
3. Movements that grow, thrive.
4. Movements are made most clear when compared to the status quo or to movements
that work to push the the other direction.
5. Exclude outsiders.
6. Tearing others down is never as helpful to a movement as building followers up.
 - pp. 103-105, [excerpts].

The Elements of Leadership
[Consider returning to this list some time in the future.] - p. 126.

The yin and yang are clear: without people pushing against your quest to do
something worth talking about, it's unlikely to be worth the journey.  Persist.
 - p. 129.

Compromise may expedite a project, but compromise can kill it as well.
 - p. 137.

