
Notes and quotes from Stand Out by Dorie Clark, 2015.

[Part 1 Finding Your Breakthrough Idea p. 15.]
[Chapter 1 The Big Idea pp. 17-32.]

Section: What Assumptions Are We Making?
Every field has useful guiding assumptions....  To find a Big Idea, you have to question the
assumptions that are keeping everyone else in check....  you need to ask "what if?" and "why
not?"
 - p. 19.

Section: What's Next?
Just about everyone can see the really big picture....
If you can find a way to help people prepare for the future - to provide real solutions to
upcoming challenges - people will clamor for your practical insights.
 - p. 24.

Section: What Can You Draw on From Your Own Experience?
To find your Big Idea, you don't need to be a university professor or plugged into the cutting
edge of the tech community.  It's also possible to draw on your own life and experiences.
 - p. 28.

[Chapter 2 Develop Your Expert Niche pp. 33-50.]

[Chapter 3 Provide New Research pp. 51-66.]

[Chapter 4 Combine Ideas pp. 67-80.]
Section: Learning From Other Fields
Sometimes your past training in other fields allows you to ask questions, or make connections,
that others resist.  Eric Schadt started his career as a mathemetician - which, as it turned out,
was perfect training for his eventual role disrupting the field of biology.
 - p. 69.

[Chapter 5 Create a Framework pp. 81-98.]

[Part 2 Building a Following Around Your Ideas p. 99.]

Most of us have some helpful professional contacts, but they're not necessarily an active
community focused on helping one another.  Very few people luck into their own personal
Bloomsbury or Harlem Renaissance; instead, you'll likely need to take action to create
such a network.
 - p. 103.

To successfully spread our ideas, most of us will need to cultivate new relationships in
addition to our core group of trusted colleagues.  Connecting with busy people is never
easy, but if you make it a consistent part of your schedule and show others why it's
worth their while, you can build a substantial network faster than you might imagine.
 - p. 113.

One of the best is leveraging affiliations to connect with like-minded people, because
your shared history or point of view allows you to build trust (and a solid relationship)
quickly....  [page break]  One particularly powerful bond is having a shared alumni
connection....
 - pp. 114-115.

Section: The Causes You Support
If there's a cause you care about, there may be ways you can integrate it into your
professional life, benefiting your community and growing your network at the same time.
Serving on charitable boards is a great opportunity for networking and skills development,
but it's even more powerful to ask: *how can I integrate a commitment to service into
everything I do?*
 - p. 120.

Section: The Power of Blogging
If you're just starting out on social media, start by listening....
If you want to be known for your ideas, you need to share them, period....  Blogging - or
video blogging, if you prefer - is one of the most powerful [page break] ways to draw
people to you and build a following around your ideas.
 - p. 124-125.

Section: Go Where the People Are
"Part of it is looking at where the audience is," he [Robert Scoble] says.  "You've got to
figure out where they *are.*  It's not about how to get them where you want them to go."
 - p. 132.

"Even if you're into the weirdest, most esoteric thing in the world, there [page break] are
probably at least fifty other people in the world into your thing," says Scoble.  "Build a
club and find them, and put your blog posts on Google so people find out."
A technique that can further accelerate your platform-building efforts is cultivating
relationships with the traditional media.  Being quoted in the mainstream media is useful
because they still have large audiences, even in an era of fragmented reading and viewing
habits.
 - p. 134-135.

Section: Write a Book
One of the classic ways to get recognized for your ideas is to write a book, ideally with
a well-known, traditional publisher....
Self-publishing, once the forlorn province of those who had been rejected everywhere else,
has become increasingly common.
 - p. 140.

Of course, it's an accomplishment to have created and spread a powerful idea, and money
and accolades may come your way as a result, but the ultimate test of an idea's value is
whether others want to take it up and spread it on their own.
 - p. 150.

Section: Become a Connector
One of the best gifts you can give is to connect people who can benefit from knowing one
another
 - p. 150.

Serving as a mentor can be a powerful way to crystallize your own ideas, give back to
others, learn new tricks, and build a base of support for your idea in the world.
 - p. 163.

Section: Make It Fun
Finally, as you think about making an impact with your work, it's also essential to ask
yourself: how can we create something people can't wait to participate in?  These days,
we're all too busy.
 - p. 165.

Section: Making Time for Reflection - p. 176
One of the best places for creative insight is the shower, where the mindless ritual
allows your brain to wander just enough to spark new insights.
 - p. 177.

As Anthony Tjan, coauthor of Heart, Smarts, Guts, and Luck: What It Takes to Be an
Entrepreneur and Build a Great Business....  As Tjan notes, "Lucky people have an openness,
an authenticity, and a generosity toward embracing people - without over thinking 'what's
the value exchange?'  It's just, *that's an interesting person*...."
 - p. 180.

There's no clear template to becoming a recognized expert in your field, which means there's
no clear template for how to support yourself as one.  Many thinkers profiled in this book
take a smorgasbord approach, earning funds in a variety of different ways.  Based on your
personality and interests, you can find the right strategy for you
 - p. 184.

Financial success probably won't come overnight.  It's rare that you can immediately make
a living from your thought leadership.
 - p. 187.

Section: Making the Effort
We all know hard work is mandatory for success, but sometimes it's difficult to conceptualize
what that actually looks like.  Here's a hint: the top performers *exponentially* outnetwork
everyone else.  "When entrepreneurs and small business people tell me about their day and
they're home by 7, I laugh," author and social media consultant Gary Vaynerchuk told me
during an interview for my *Forbes* blog.
 - p. 193.

