
Notes and Quotes from Gaslighting America: Why We Love It When Trump Lies to Us, 2018.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Chapter 1 - Birthing a President
His [Donald Trump's] intense commitment to his outlandish ideas is a form of virtue signaling to his base.  It says,
"I'll do anything to win and beat the people you don't like."
- p. 8.

Gaslighting is far more aggressive than any of these misguided lies.  It's an elaborate scheme undertaken to gain control over
people.  Trump is an expert gaslighter and what I want you to understand that there is a very specific method to his madness.
- p. 15.

[These] steps are almost always present in his political attacks...:
o Stake a Claim....
o Advance and Deny....
o Create Suspense....
o Discredit the Opponent....
o Win....
- p. 15.

Chapter 2 - Winning Ugly
[none]

Chapter 3 - #War
I remember him [Andrew Breitbart] relaying his now well-known mantra, "Politics is downstream from culture," and explaining the importance
of bringing our conservative perspective to the media.
- p. 23.

Gay marriage wasn't the only issue liberals demanded rapid acceptance of during the Obama years that generated lots of attention in right-
wing media.  In 2008 transgenderism was barely known, but by 2916 Democrats were call to provide government-mandated benefits for it.  The
idea that sex-change therapies and surgery should be freely available came into vogue, on demand for middle schoolers and members of the
United States military alike.  Conservatives, for the most part, questioned the wisdom of allowing minors to transform their God-given
bodies with drugs and surgery or taxpayer funding of such procedures for convicted soldiers like Chelsea Manning.  They wanted a safe place
to hash this out.  Conservative media provided that.
Then there is abortion, the gruesome matter that sends people running into opposing bunkers faster than anything else.  I hesitate to even
discuss it; it's so sickening, so upsetting, but that's all the more reason not to shy away.  Here we go.  A few years ago, a legitimate
house of horrors was discovered in West Philadelphia, run by Philadelphia abortionist Dr. Kermit Gosnell.
- p. 27.

Chapter 4 - Terrorized
[none]
Chapter 5 - Inside Job
[none]
Chapter 6 - Burned
[none]

Chapter 7 - The Pledge
Through it all, Trump is totally committed to his story, like a method actor.  That's because there can be no halfway measures of gaslighting;
it's an all-or-nothing proposition.  If he doesn't appear to fully believe what he's saying, he could never convince anyone else.  Thus, Trump
never, ever breaks character or gives his audience reason to doubt their confidence in him.  It all has the net effect of making him look and
sound strong.  Voila!  The things Trump fans love about him are the specific traits he best exhibits when he's gaslighting.
Therein lies the real secret to Trump's success.  It's not the "art of the deal," as he titled his bestselling memoir that made him famous.
It's in the *sell.*  And Trump's cunning ability to sell anything is what propelled him to gaslight America all the way to the White House.
All he does is keep applying the same method to different circumstances.  By the time you reach the end of this book, you'll be able to predict
Trump's -- that supposed political madman -- next move with ease.
- p. 72.  [Emphasis in original as italics.]

Chapter 8 - Surrogate Secrets
As a frequent CNN panelist through the 2016 season I had the occasion to debate Trump surrogates and closely observe the various strategies they
used to defend him.  Many of them would later be adopted by other Republicans once Trump became president.  I became familiar with them and you
can too.  Let me reveal to you the tricks they use.
WHATABOUTISM:  Trump's allies frequently employed a rhetorical device that comes straight out of the Soviet Union.  Known as a type of logical
fallacy called to quoque, or "appeal to hypocrisy," it boils down to answering a tough question with another question: "What about [this]?"
[The preceding square brackets appear in the original.]  ....  [This involves essentially changing the subject, e.g., when confronted about
something Trump did, change the subject to something Obama did.]
- pp. 91-92.
ANTI-ANTI-TRUMPISM: The natural outgrowth of whataboutism is "anti-anti-Trumpism."  It's used by Republicans who are reluctant to align themselves
with Trump, but will attack those who attack him in the name of stopping liberalism.  Even if it means abandoning conservative values to do it....
- p. 92.
TRUMPSPLAINING: This is the idea that only Trump sympathizers are capable of properly interpreting Trump....
[In my mind the classic example, which Amanda doesn't mention, is to say he was just joking.]
[W]hen Trump made a typo in a tweet -- writing "Despite the constant negative press covfefe" -- his press secretary, Sean Spicer, took this
approach to comedic lengths.  Rather than admit what was an obvious typo Spicer caid, "The president and a small group of people know exactly
what he meant."
- p. 93.
EVERYONE DOES IT: Occasionally, a Trump supporter will admit to something egregious that Trump has said, but will find a way to blame it on
other people and claim he was right to say it.
- p. 93.
FIGURATIVELY, NOT LITERALLY: This is the belief that one should always assume the best possible "figurative" interpretation of whatever Trump
"literally" says.
- p. 94.
PLAY PRETEND: Sometimes Trump surrogates would pretend Trump had said something completely different from what he did.  Vice President Mike Pence
turned this technique into an art form while on the stump for Trump, displaying it exceptionally well during his vice president debate against
Tim Kaine.
- p. 94.

Chapter 9 - Punch 'Em in the Face
Psychological researchers at the University of Arizona who studied the effects of anger and anxiety in the presence of a perceived enemy -- when
it came to Trump rallies, this was the media -- found the dynamic can be emotionally rewarding to those feeling insecure.  "The feeling of anger
along with the identification of an enemy then increases one's sense of control and certainty," the study stated.  Trump's attacks on the media
gave supporters who were angry and fearful of the future a nice, psychological high.  It was like Trump was saying to them, "Look, there is the
enemy right there and we will not be afraid to confront them anymore!"
- p. 110.


If you didn't know that advancing and denying a narrative at the same time was one of Trump's staple techniques, you would think that a statement
he made on March 14 to be strange [sic].  "The press is now calling, they're saying, 'Oh, but there's such violence.'  There's no violence,"
Trump said before hedging a bit.  "You know how many people have been hurt at our rallies?  I think like, basically none, other than I guess maybe
somebody got hit once or something.  But there's no violence."  Yes, someone maybe got hit, but no violence, no!
- p. 112.

Look no further than what happened with a reporter from the Trump-friendly *Breitbart News* named Michelle Fields covered one of Trump's press
conferences at the Trump National Golf Club in Jupiter, Florida.  During that time, she was a well-regarded and welcome guest on many conservative
programs.  Everything changed the moment she approached Trump after the press conference to ask a question about affirmative action.  As she wrote
in one of her last pieces for *Breitbart News:* [page break]
  *Trump acknowledged the question, but before he could answer I was jolted backwards.  Someone had grabbed me tightly by the
  arm and yanked me down.  I almost fell to the ground, but was able to maintain my balance.  Nonetheless, I was shaken....*
The Trump campaign flatly denied that any such incident had occurred, calling Fields's account "entirely false."  Trump's aides didn't go through the
steps, but they did their best to gaslight Fields, making her out to be some crazy woman who had made up the whole story for attention.  This wasn't
the kind of gaslighting Trump and his team were good at.  They weren't controlling the narrative; they were trying to make it go away.  Gaslighting
never works as well defensively as it does affirmatively.
- pp. 112-113.  [Emphasis in original as italics.]

Chapter 10 - Kayfabe
He [Sociologist Nick Rogers] explained:
   *To a wrestling audience, the fake and the real coexist peacefully.  If you ask a fan whether a match or backstage
   brawl is scripted, the question will seem irrelevant.  Kayfabe isn't about factual verifiability; it's about
   emotional fidelity....  Ask an average [page break] Trump supporter whether he or she thinks the president plans
   to build a giant wall and have Mexico pay for it, and you might get an answer that boils down to, "I don't think
   so, but I believe so."  That's kayfabe.  Chants of "Build the Wall" aren't about erecting a structure; they're
   about how cathartic it feels, in the moment, to yell with venom against a common enemy....  Kayfabe isn't merely
   a suspension of disbelief, it is philosophy about truth itself.  It rests on the assumption that feelings are
   inherently more trustworthy than facts.*
- pp. 130-131.

Chapter 11 - The Cult of Kek
To this day, there is no socially appropriate way for white males to express grievance without the risk of being branded as sexists or racists.  This is
why the alt-right was formed and why it continues to exist in such an ugly fashion.  If someone is going to be unfairly branded as a bigot, the thinking
goes, why not go all in?
- p. 134.

Chapter 12 - Hacks
[none]

Chapter 13 - Bimbo Eruptions
We all know they [Bill and Hillary Clinton] were blowing smoke.  President Clinton personally invited Monica Lewinsky into his private quarters, but when
their secret came out, she was depicted as some obsessed groupie.  As if there was nothing anyone could do to stop a young woman with an out-of-control
crush on the leader of the free world from gaining access to him and the most protected spaces in America.  Illogical, yet that was the line they took.
In a letter to her friend Diane Blair, Hillary called Lewinsky a "narcissitic loony toon."  They gaslit Lewinsky, although few people recognized it at the
time.  And, hand it to the Clintons, it worked.  Bill got to keep on being president and Monica got her life ruined.
- p. 147.
- p. .

Chapter 14 - Lock Her Up
[none]
Chapter 15 - President Trump
[none]
Chapter 16 - Nixon's Shadow
[none]

Afterword: Fireproofing
Typically, gaslighting is a type of manipulation that takes place in one-on-one romatic relationships.  Think of a cheating boyfriend who calls his girlfriend
a "psycho" when she becomes suspicious about his late-night text messages from other women.  Or the woman who convinces her husband that the leaky faucet,
broken-down car, and inability to live out her dream lifestyle of the rich and famous is all his fault.  In the worst cases, it becomes a debilitating form of
mental abuse.  Victims find themselves forced to defend themselves from outlandish accusations, trapped in unwinnable circular arguments, and apologizing for
circumstances they have no control over.  Victims live in a constant state of uncertainty and lose confidence in their ability to react to events.  They become
dependent on their gaslighters and unwilling to object to their statements and actions.
- p. 185.

What are we going to do about it?  Well, reading this book is a good start!  You can't tackle a problem until you know exactly what it is.  You recognize what
he's doing now.  You've felt crazy, confused, fed up, flustered, and all bejiggity [sic] for a reason.  It's not you, it's him.  Truly.  Now the hard part.
(Take a deep breath.)  Accept the fact that Trump's gaslighting cannot be stopped.  Yes, that's right.  The. Gaslighting.  Cannot.  Be.  Stopped.
- p. 186.

First, us.  The people and the media.
Let go of the outrage already.  It's too exhausting to keep up and it plays right into Trump's (imaginarily large) hands anyhow.  Pushing people to the point of
hysterics is the goal of gaslighting.  Don't give in to it.  Be concerned, be engaged, be vigilant but don't flip out.  Take another deep breath.  Take many.
Go back to Step One of Trump's gaslighting method: the narrative.  When Trump blurts out something new about the next off-the-wall subject, ask yourself what his
objective might be.  Why is he focusing on this particular person or thing?  What he's saying may not be the real message he's pushing.
- p. 187.

Blunting the effectiveness of Step Two -- the advance-and-deny stage -- is more complicated....  The key is pinning him down on where he's getting the information.
Trump's critics often accuse him of "making things up," but he rarely does.  He's passing along gossip that's already making its way through the grapevine.  Next,
stop asking Trump to retract or apologize.  He never will.  Ask him to explain himself.  That's where he struggles.  No interviewer should waste his or her breath
attempting to get Trump to take back something he said or did.  He will always double down and reap the benefit of demonstrating to his supporters, yet again, the
strength of his convictions, however misguided they may be.
- p. 188.

When Trump engages the advance-and-deny stage of his gaslighting, feel free to tune out.  This is usually the point where the media goes bananas, endlessly
speculating and debating what exactly it is that Trump is saying.  This is where far too much of Trump's dirty work is done for him.  One comment will explode into
hundreds of breathless clickbait articles.  Think of it as Trump spam and most of it is unsolicited, worthless junk.
- p. 189.

If you can identify a good clickbait headline, you are more than capable of fireproofing yourself from Trump's Step Three, the suspense building.  His favorite words
to use are: "We'll see."  The information is always coming "soon," usually in "two weeks."
- p. 189.

By the time Trump gets to Step Four -- the discrediting -- people are usually fully engulfed in his gaslighting.  The best one can do is try to [page break] see what's
coming next.  Twitter is his tool of choice for this stage.  It's the platform where he tests his jabs.
- pp. 189-190.

Finally, there is Trump's last step: winning.  Trump has convined many of his most hard-core supporters that even the worst kind of political news is, somehow, sunshine
and roses for Trump.  Case in point, after CNN reported that Trump campaign manager Paul Manafort had been wiretapped by federal investigators, *Brietbart News* ran the
following headline: "Trump Vindicated: Shock Report Says Obama Government Wiretapped Trump Campaign."  It should not have to be said, but it does: News that someone's
campaign manager was under federal investigation is not a selling point for that candidate.
- p. 190.  [Emphasis in original as italics.]

The test, for all conspiracy theories, comes down to a scientific concept called "falsifiability."  It sounds counterintuitive, but for a scientific theory to be true,
there must be something that can prove it untrue.  The same goes for conspiracies.  Like, say, the political system is controlled by lizard people, which a 2013 Public
Policy Polling survey found 12 million Americans believe.
The thing that makes the conspiracy theory successful is that there is no way to disprove it....  The cover-up is bigger than you could ever know!  Everyone is in on it.
The CIA, United Nations, the Illuminati -- and they're all out to get us!
You see how this goes.  Every successful conspiracy requires that the lack of proof for the theory also be the proof of the theory.  This is why they persist.  There is
no way to prove them wrong.
One question can determine whether you are dealing with either a conspiracy theorist or someone who may be able to explain some questionable phenomena: "What evidence
would prove this isn't true?"  If the answer is nothing, back away slowly.  You're dealing with a full-blown conspiracy theorist!  There's no use in the conversation
aside from the entertainment value.  If you take it seriously, you'll only spin around in dizzying logic circles until you fall flat on your face.
- p. 191.

Now for the second part of this discussion: how political candidates can fireproof themselves in this new gaslit America.  There are three things that must be done.
In the past, canddiates were praised for their ability to stay on message.  They had "message discipline."
- p. 192.

This [having "message discipline"] kind of advice may have worked in the past, but the bar for authenticity is much higher today.  Those who insist on such message
discipline are taking a sitcom-script approach to a reality TV-obsessed world.
- p. 192.

My second piece of advice for candidates: Talk big.  Be fresh.  Sell the dream.
- p. 196.

I get it's tiresome to have to repeat something you may have previously stated in a thoughtful and eloquent way somewhere else, but that's too bad.  A candidate can't
expect people to go look it up when the candidate is right there in the flesh for the very purpose of answering questions.
- p. 197.

- p. 200.

