
Notes and quotes from First Ladies of the Republic by Jeanne E. Abrams, 2018.

Introduction - Forging the Role of First Lady - pp. 5-44
The term "First Lady" was probably not commonly used in print until the 1860s when Mary Todd Lincoln occupied the
position, although President Zachary Taylor is reputed to have earlier referred to Dolley Madison as the "first
lady of the land," and it may have first been formally applied to President James Buchanan's niece, who served as
his White House hostess in the late 1850s.  But in retrospect we can surely apply the title to the initial "First
Ladies" examined in this book, who were all extremely capable, strong women.
 - p. 7.

As [Linda Grant] De Pauw points out, although Abigail was an uncommon woman of superior in-[page break]telligence,
with a sophisticated grasp of politics and liberal leanings, at heart, like her husband John, she never was an
egalitarian.  Both the Adamses hoped that, after the revolution, the new American government would allow for
broader mass support.  But at the same time, they believed in a hierarchical order that would not challenge the
position of the elite.  For the most part, American women of the eighteenth century, including Abigail, who
exhibited concerns about the treatment of women, were focused narrowly on reform of the common law of coverage
and legal equality, rather than on broad political equality.
 - pp. 16-17.

She [the Noted early American historian Mary Beth Norton] maintains that, before the late 1670s, "notions of rigid,
gendered divisions between the terms public (male) and private (female) did not exist" and in reality public
political roles much more closely reflected and were tied to social status rather than gender.  However, by the
mid-eighteenth century, the belief that women should be confined to what became termed the "private domestic
sphere" "had become the assumptive norm," and by the advent of the Revolution, males dominated the public sphere,
and even elite women had become marginalized politically.
 - p. 21.

Although the practical, down-to-earth, and personable Martha may not have been "intellectually sophisticated," she
was certainly a capable manager and an avid reader who appreciated music and artistic culture and followed current
events as well.
 - p. 33.

Chapter One
Martha Washington - The Road to the First Ladyship - pp. 45-100
It is quite obvious that the normally self-effacing Martha experienced some degree of exhilaration as she realized
she had become a famous and perhaps even influential figure.
 - p. 65.

Some historians have dismissed Martha Washington as an intellectual lightweight, probably because of her strong focus
on the southern ideal of female domesticity and her notoriously faulty grammar and spelling.  That perception demeans
the importance of women's domestic work in the colonial and early republic era, as well as her efforts on behalf of
the new nation in the increasingly important social arena.
 - p. 68.

When Martha was present at social occasions, the ambiance was markedly improved.  The First Lady was also said to be
especially sensitive to the needs of former Revolutionary War soldiers, greeting them graciously if they came to
visit, and although these gestures reflected Martha's private inclinations, they also served as effective and perhaps
conscious public relations efforts that helped enhance George's reputation among veterans.
 - p. 73.

Increasing criticism about the Washingtons' court style clearly stung Martha.  It might have been another ingredient
that influenced her negative comments to her niece Fanny, in which she famously maintained that she often felt like
"a state prisoner" in her role as First Lady.
 - p. 80.

Chapter Two
Abigail and John Adams - The Long Apprenticeship to the White House - pp. 101-156
Despite being delicate, she was a very determined young woman.  Abigail's feelings for John were so strong that she
married him despite the apparent disapproval of her parents and especially her mother's believ that the fiercely
intelligent but brash young lawyer was beneath their daughter's social station and that his career prospects were
limited.  Even as a teenager, Abigail was able to appreciate John's sensitivity, dry humor, and fierce sense of loyalty
under the sometimes tough exterior.  When she wed, the slim, petite Abigail was nineteen years old.  John was nine years
her seior and, at around five feet six inches tall, he was half a foot taller than Abigail and already on the road to
stoutness.  Adams was born in Braintree, Massachusetts, on October 30, 1735.  From the beginning of their marriage,
Abigail kept the brilliant and principled but sometimes vain, prickly, and erratic John grounded, and her natural
serenity and optimism were a strong influence on taming his often mercurial temperament.  As the historian Joseph Ellis
ut it, Abigail provided John's "ballast."
By all accounts their long marriage of almost sixty years was a loving and enduring partnership, attested to by well
over a thousand affectionate letters.  And from the beginning, it appears that John recognized and appreciated Abigail's
keen intelligence, strong character, resilience, and gnerally cheerful disposition.
 - p. 105.

Abigail herself had ambiguous and sometimes contradictory views about the role of women in the public sphere.
 - p. 113.

Abigail detested [John] Hancock, whom she viewed as a charlatan and lacking in integrity, but she correctly predicted he
would be voted in by what she described as the misguided "Lovers of the tinkeling cymbal."
 - p. 128.

She [Abigail] commented to her niece Lucy Cranch that the exposure to scientific subjects was "like going into a Beautifull
Country, which I never saw before, a Country which our American Females are not permitted to visit or inspect."
In that letter written in the spring of 1787, Abigail continued to share her views with Lucy about the importance of female
education, but what is really eye-opening are the sentiments she first put to pen in the *draft.*  In that version, Abigail
was very frank about what she clearly understood as the inherent contradictions between progressive ideals and the role of
women in the new United States republic.  Although she clearly subscribed to the popular notion of republican wife and
mother, believing an educated woman could be "a pleasing companion to the man of Science & of Sensibility," and "form the
minds of her children to virtue & to knowledge," as well as continue to steward the "domestic economy of her family," at the
same time she advocated for enlarged opportunities for women.
 - p. 138.

Chapter Three
Abigail Adams - The Second First Lady - pp. 157-200
Nearly all of Abigail's many biographers have titled their chapter relating to the period in which she served as the
presidential spouse as "splendid misery."  That assessment had originally been offered by a friend, but it was one that
Abigail initially felt was at least partly accurate.  Yet, as Abigail's many successors would learn, no presidential couple
was immune from intense public scrutiny, harsh criticism, and multiple challenges, and she would find that her position as
First Lady [page break] held many positive moments as well.
 - pp. 161-162.

She [Abigail] refused to even consider France as a republic after the revolution but simply regarded it, as did [philosopher
Edmund] Burke, as an anarchic, godless, and violent entity.
 - p. 174.

Nevertheless, John's defeat, coupled with the death of her beloved son, Charles, capped a dark period for the First Lady.
Yet the resilient partnership that Abigail and John had developed helped them both endure the personal tragedy and the
painful political blow, and they stood poised with regret, tempered by some measure of relief, to "retire from public
life."
Moreover, Abigail maintained that when it was clear John would not be reelected, she made up her mind to retire with
dignity without wishing any of her husband's political detractors ill.
 - p. 191.

Her [Abigail's] ever-present taste for her "dish of politics" was the result of a combination of factors that inclined her
toward a life-long interest in public issues.  They included her own keen intellect and ever-curious mind; the fact that her
father William Smith had been a prominent Congregationalist minister and her maternal grandfather, John Quincy, an active
politician; her own deep-seated religious faith; and her committed support of the American Revolution.
 - p. 199.

Chapter Four
Dolley Madison - The First Lady as "Queen of America" - pp. 201-252
The nation's third First Lady, born Dolley Payne, drew upon elements her predecessors had introduced, but she made the position
uniquely her own by astutely expanding her sphere of influence through intentional social interactions.  Dolley Payne Todd
Madison appears to have a charismatic personality almost from birth and was known for the ability to make friends easily.  She
was born on May 20, 1768, in North Carolina to committed Virginia Quakers John and Mary Coles Payne, who transplanted their
growing family to that sother colony before returning after a year to Virginia, where Dolley grew up.
 - p. 203.

During the entire eight years of her husband's administration, Dolley managed to combine a regal presence with a spirit of
social inclusiveness and down-to-earth accessibility, which exuded the well-known southern hospitality.
 - p. 224.

Margaret Bayard Smith noted admiringly that at the inauguration ball, "She looked like a queen," one who exuded "dignity" and
"grace."  Smith further maintained that "It would [page break] be *absolutely impossible* for any one to behave with more
perfect propriety than she did....It seems to me that such manners would disarm envy itself and connciliate even enemies.
 - pp. 224-225.

In addition to her sociopolitical influence, Dolly was also a "principal actor" in the events surrounding the War of 1812 and
became regarded as a heroine for remaining in the White House as the British approached.
 - p. 232.

In essence, Dolley became the nation's symbolic cheerleader during the war, raising public morale with her positive attitude.
Despite serious threats to the nation, during the war Dolley's already well attended drawing rooms attracted as man as five
hundred guests....  In other words, Dolley did the hands-on "dirty" work for him, and with her active intervention, James
Madison was reelected in December 1812, although by only a narrow margin over his opponent DeWitt Clinton.
 - p. 238.
As a result of the tide of the war turning toward the American side, and with Dolley's decided influence, Madison's election
was assured.  Allgor maintains that Dolley played a major role--perhaps even a more central one that [sic] James Madsison
himself--in that successful outcome, despite the "disastrous war and domestic unrest" that plagued his administration.
 - p. 239.

In the end, Madison's tenure became best known for the ill-advised War of 1812, one that Dolley supported faithfully.
 - p. 240.

In one instance, Dolley reigned at a crowded reception in honor of the new British minister to the United States. ...the
British minister ... declared "She looked every inch a queen."
 - p. 242.

Dolley was singled out during those events for special praise for her charm, glamour, and social talents and especiall for
her ability to get along with people from all classes and political persuasions.
 - p. 242.

Conclusion - The First Ladyship Launched - pp. 253-262
The unfolding lives of Martha Washington, Abigail Adams, and Dolley Madison during the early days of the fledgling United
States vividly demonstrate that the republican experiment was not only a male enterprise.  Although they possessed neither
the vote nor the ability to hold office, the three women played important roles in the building of the nation, and albeit to
varying degrees, they were active participants in a broadly conceived ublic sphere.
 - p. 253.

If women rarely, if ever, took a leading role in governmental decisions, it is still the case that the three First Ladies
could and did influence the development of the nations early political culture.
 - p. 256.

George Washington, John Adams, and James Madison would have likely agreed with the American physician James Tilton, who
wrote, "The men possess the more ostensible powers of making and executing the laws.  The women, [page break] in every free
contry, have an absolute control of manners; and it is confessed, that in a republic, manners are of equal importance with
laws."
 - pp. 258-259.

As has been noted, the ability of elite political women such as Martha Washington, Abigail Adams, and Dolley Madison to host
and socialize with political players from both sides of the aisle in "quasi-public parlors" made them pivotal actors in the
early republic arena.  They were often able to diffuse some of the significant polarizations between opposing parties.
 - p. 259.

