
Notes and quotes from Ties That Bound, Founding First Ladies and Slaves by Marie Jenkins Schwartz, 2017.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Introduction: See and Unseen
But if the First Lady is considered to be the President's hostess or wife, Sally Hemings cannot be
considered First Lady on either count.  She played no public role except in the opposition press, where
Jefferson's political enemies did their best to embarrass him by revealing the relationship.  On the other
hand, Sally Hemings was not a passing fancy, but an important part of Thomas Jefferson's life.
 - p. 6.

Chapter 1 - The Widow Washington
In Philadelphia, George and Martha had mixed free and enslaved servants with disasterous results.  Oney
Judge had no been the only slave to escape from the city.  The cook Hercules had fled in 1797, right before
the end of Washington's second term as President.
 - p. 31.

Perhaps 7 percent of the slaves at Mount Vernon ran away between 1760 and 1799, a rate similar to that on
other Virginia plantations.
 - p. 31.

Chapter 2 - Martha Dandridge
From this distance, we cannot be sure what methods Martha used to get young slaves to perform their chores.
She likely employed the methods of other slaveholders: a combination of rewards and punishments.  A special
treat given with a smile or a smack on the hand with a stick could remind young slaves to attend to tasks,
as could a warning to a child's parent.  Slaveholders were not above threatening parents with the sale of
children who misbehaved, which encouraged mothers and fathers to use any means necessary to ensure that
children obeyed an owner's orders.
 - p. 40.

Her upbringing taught Martha Dandridge to accept slavery -- even its worst features -- as part of life....
She, like other whites, would have understood the danger: slaves might rebel and seek retribution.  Individual
slaves regularly resisted on local farms, and rumors of slave insurrection abounded in the neighborhood.
 - p. 42.

White Virginians maintained that a rigid separation of the races was important, yet white men breached the
color line time and again.  Politicians and ministers damned interracial liasons, and wrote laws and preached
against them, but with little result.
 - p. 43.

Ann Dandridge was Martha's half sister and lived as a slave in the Dandridge home until Jack died in 1756.
 - p. 44.

Chapter 4 - Mistress of Mount Vernon
The Washingtons had raised Jacky [John Parke Custis, Martha's son from her first marriage to Daniel Parke Custis]
to assume the prerogatives of his class.  Unfortunately, one such supposed prerogative was the sexual exploitation
of enslaved women.
 - p. 64.

This [fathering a child with one of the slaves] was not unusual.  But if the charge against Jacky is true, his
case is shocking even by the standards of a society that abided egregious cases of rape because Jacky's victim was
Ann Dandridge, his mother's half sister and Jacky's aunt.
 - p. 64.

Martha handled her son's sexual offense as she had her father's.  She pretended it had not occurred and incorporated
the resulting child into her domestic circle.
 - p. 64.

Chapter 5 - Revolutionary War
Managing slaves under the best of circumstances was not easy because they had multiple ways of expressing discontent,
including running away or hiding out for a time.
 - p. 68.

George Washington himself had developed scruples about separating enslaved families through sale.  He was willing to
do it but only so long as it was not publicly known.
 - p. 68.

At first he [George Washington] opposed recruitment of black soldiers to the patriot cause, even signing an order
forbidding it, but war needs pressed, and he changed his mind.  Once he saw black troops on the battlefield, he
realized their worth as soldiers and began to question their rightful place in the nation.
 - p. 77.

"Blacks," she [Martha Washington] wrote [to her sister Fanny], "are so bad in their nature that they have not the
least gratitude for the kindness that may be shewed to them."
 - p. 78.

Chapter 7 - Slaves in the President's House
Of the eleven men elected to the presidency after George Washington left office and before the Civil War, seven
staffed the President's house with slaves.
 - p. 96.

People who interviewed Oney [Judge] in the 1840s described her as "very much freckled" and "nearly white."
 - p. 97.

George Washington was keenly aware that he was President of the South *and* the North.  As if to reassure both
southern and norther interests, the Washingtons set about establishing a household that incorporated both enslaved
and free workers.  But the Washingtions found the free laborers difficult to supervise.
 - p. 101.

By all accounts, the Washingtons' slaves in Philadelphia lived well in comparison to other bonded people, which made
Oney Judge's defection so shocking to them....  It was easy enough to disappear in the streets of Philadelphia; the
city had become known as a haven for runaway slaves.
 - p. 106.

Oney's disappearance was a personal loss for Martha, but it was also an embarrassment to the President and First
Lady.  Oney's escape revealed all too clearly the discontent that slaveholders denied existed among the people they
held in bondage.
 - p. 107.

He [George Washington] worried about how it would look for the President of the United States to chase after a runaway
slave, but Martha was unwilling to let her maid go.  He decided to use underhanded, even illegal, means to bring Oney
home in order to keep the matter out of the public eye.
 - p. 110.

Oney Judge was not the only servant to escape enslavement in Philadelphia.  The cook Herculese, like Oney a well-
trained and trusted slave, fled to parts unknown....  To ensure Hercules's cooperation, the Washingtons extended
privileges....  For example, Hercules was allowed to sell leftovers from the kitchen....
 - p. 112.

Herculese had discretion in spending his income and the Washingtons' permission to travel about the city.
 - p. 112.

The loss of Hercules was a great blow to the Washingtons.
 - p. 115.

Chapter 9 - Martha Wayles
Her [Martha's] mother died soon after she was born.  She was raised by a series of stepmothers who also died.  After
that, her father's enslaved concubine Elizabeth (Betty) Hemings took charge of Martha's care, along with that of her
three half sisters born to her father and his second wife.  Betty Hemings simultaneously cared for her own ten
children, six of whom were also Martha's half siblings.  Truth *can* be stranger than fiction.
 - p. 128.

Martha Jefferson is today less well known than Martha Washington and Dolley Madison, in large part because she died
so young but also because few documents survive in her own handwriting.
 - p. 129.

Chapter 10 - Mistress of Monticello I
Everyone knew that at times slaves took items they needed or wanted.  When federal officials interviewed former slaves
during the 1930s to record their stories for future generations, the elicited numerous confessions from people who
said that they had, in the antebellum era, taken or "borrowed" items from masters and mistresses.
 - p. 147.

Evenings and Sundays (typical times when enslaved people were "off duty") allowed time for gardening, fishing, raising
poultry, cooking, bathing, worshipping, and a host of other activities that defined enslaved people as more than the
mistress's cook, seamstress, or laundress.
 - p. 150.

Over the years, Martha continued to purchase or trade with slaves for poultry.
 - p. 151.

Chapter 11 - War in Virginia
When the war was over, Thomas Jefferson distinguished between the slaves who had run away of their own volition and those
who had been carried off.  The former were either given away or sold.  Apparently the architect of American liberty did
not relish the idea of owning enslaved people who shared his ideals.
 - p. 156.

Chapter 12 - Birth and Death at Monticello
This was an age, after all, when physicians relied on drastic measures -- puking, poking, purging, cutting, bleeding, and
dosing with strong medicines -- to achieve drastic results.  It should come as no surprise that enslaved people preferred
les extreme measures, often herbal teas.
 - p. 163.

Chapter 13 - Patsy Jefferson and Sally Hemings
About the same time as the liaison between Sally and Thomas is said to have begun, Sally's older half sister Mary Hemings
entered into a sexual relationship with Thomas Bell, a wealthy Charlottesville merchant to whom she had been hired while
Jefferson was in France.  The two lived together openly as common law man and wife for the remainder of their lives and
had two children.
 - p. 174.

Sally likely had questions for her mother....  First and foremost, social convention dictated that no one acknowldge the
affair, even when children were born who [page break] closely resembled the father.  Flaunting a union across the color
line could have serious consequences for everyone.
 - pp. 178-179.

Historians have offered disparate explanations for why Thomas Jefferson became less willing to question slavery over time.
Part of the answer lies in his ambitions for his daughters.  Giving them slaves was a way to ensure their future wealth
and happiness.
Thomas Jefferson worked quickly to ensure Patsy and her husband had enough land and slaves to count themselves among the
state's grandees.
 - p. 182.

Would Sally Hemings have borne Thomas Jefferson's children if Martha Jefferson lived?  It hardly seems likely.
 - p. 186.

Chapter 14 - First Lady
According to the standards of the day, it was the job of white mistresses to ensure that no scandalous behavior tarnished
a family's reputation, but her [Patsy's] father's continuing relationship with Sally Hemings caused tongues to wag.  At
first, only locals paid attention, but eventually the entire country became embroiled in talk about Thomas Jefferson's
sexual indiscretions.
 - p. 187.

It was Patsy's time in Washington in the winters of 1802-1803 and 1805-1806 that has earned her a place in the First Ladies
exhibit in the Smithsonian Institution.
 - p. 188.

One reason the story caught on and spread so quickly was that aversion toward interracial sex had been growing.  Relationships
that had been tolerated in the eighteenth century came under greater scrutiny at the start of the nineteenth.
 - p. 194.

Patsy and [William A.] Burwell together confronted her father with it ["a particularly offensive bit of doggerel penned by
Irish poet Thomas Moore], but he laughed and refused to discuss it....  She was humiliated by the gossip and unable to
respond.
 - p. 199.

The births of Madison, on 18 January 1805, and his brother Thomas Eston Hemings (called Eston), on 21 May 1808, are remarkable
beause they show that the public scandal involving the President and his slave had done nothing to cool the relationship
between Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings.  Eston was said from birth to have closely resembled his father.  The DNA testing
that now bolders the claim....
 - p. 205.

Chapter 16 - The Hemingses
Harriet Hemings left Monticello in 1822.  No one pursued her, and her fate remains unknown....  Beverly was older -- about
twenty-four -- when he left Monticello, but Harriet was twenty-one.  Beverly's departure was no doubt delayed so he could
accompany his sister.  Neither Madison nor Eston had reached the age of twenty-onein 1822, which explains why they did not
leave with their siblings.
 - p. 228.

The former President wrote in his farm journal that Harriet Hemings and her brother Beverly had run away, although it is
clear -- especially in the case of Harriet -- that they were aided.
 - p. 228.

Harriet and Beverly could have passed for white not only by virtue of their looks, but also by virtue of their education.
 - p. 229.

Subsequent generations of Americans have wondered how Thomas Jefferson justified in his own mind making Sally Hemings his
paramour, given the virulent racism he that shared with his white contemporaries.  The explanation is that he did not think
of Sally or her children as black.
 - p. 230.

Chapter 17 - Death of Thomas Jefferson
Ellen Randolph Coolidge explained the problem this way: her grandfather had run up debt because he did not wish to overwork
his slaves....  The Randolphs evidently found it more palatable to blame the victims of Virginia's economic system than the
former President or themselves.
 - p. 237.

Many wondered why Thomas Jeffersom did not follow the example of George Washington and bequeath his slaves freedom.  But
Jefferson was no Washington.  He was not wealthy enough both to live a lifew of luxury and to free his slaves.  He had
managed to do only the one.
 - p. 241.

Chapter 18 - Dolley Payne
Before Dolley was out of her teens, her parents had emancipated their slaves and left Virginia for Pennsylvania and its
promise of freedome for all.
 - p. 247.

For the most part, whites evacuated the city [Philadelphia].  Blacks did not.  Although Philadelphia was progressive for its
time, its white citizens expected blacks (free and enslaved) to stay behind to take care of the ill and the dead.
 - p. 253.

Chapter 20 - First Lady
Dolley's efforts to bridge political divides through social interactions helped keep the nascent democracy from splintering
and furthered her husband's political goals.
 - p. 268.

Dolley imposed slavery on her guests and by implication helped to impose it on the nation.
 - p. 268.

Elaborate plumed headdresses made her one of the tallest people (if not the tallest) at any gathering.  However crowded the
room, she was visible at all times to all her guests.
 - p. 274.

Moreover, when Madison himself was ill, as he often was, Dolley nursed him and made sure the nation's business did not suffer.
Dolley seemed to make up for James's weaknessses, her personality countervailing her husband's perceived shortcomings.
 - p. 275.

Chapter 21 - Mistress of Montpelier
Slaves' purchases did more than meet subsistence needs.  When enslaved people donned clothing of their own choosing, they were
constructing an identity that went beyond that of a slave.  On other days, slaves wore the uniform clothing prescribed by owners,
but on Sundays thy could dress more to their liking.  So important was the need to maintain a separate identity that even slaves
who had no money found ways to adorn their bodies.
 - p. 293.

Chapter 22 - Decline of Montpelier
Montpelier was one of many Virginia plantations experiencing financial difficulties in those years [c. 1826].  Disease and harsh
weather plagued farmers large and small.
 - p. 303.

Slaveholders were not so much forcing women into sexual relationships (although that did happen) as rewarding those who had
children (e.g., with better housing, food, or clothing) and punishing those who did not (e.g., through sale).
 - p. 305.

[Dolley' cousin] Edward [Coles] had grown up in an elite family whose wealth stemmed from slaveholding.  Having decided as a
young man that slaveholding was immoral, he made up his mind to free any slaves he inherited, but he kept the decision to
himself.  If his father suspected that Edward would emancipate any inherited slaves, he could have (and probably would have)
bequeathed his youngest son another type of property.
 - p. 306.

Chapter 23 - The Widow Madison
She [Dolley] was inclined to think of slaves in terms of what they did for her, rather than as sentient human beings.  Following
the death of her cook, Dolley mourned the loss of her services while expressing no sympathy for the woman's family and friends.
 - p. 316.

Chapter 26 - Death of Dolley Madison
Upon his death of typhoid fever on 16 January 1852, Payne [Dolley's son John Payne Todd] did what his mother could not bring
herself to do: free the remaining Madison slaves....  Payne's decision to let his slaves go was no doubt made easier by his lack
of close relationships with family members.
 - p. 343.

She [Dolley] had always enjoyed a great deal of influence over James, and as he grew weaker her power to sway him grew stronger.
Yet, Edward Coles directed all of his powers of persuasion at James, not Dolley.  It was perhaps the greatest flaw in his scheme
to emancipate the Madison slaves: he tried to convince the former President that his legacy depended on what he -- not she -- did
about them.
 - p. 348.

Epilogue - Inside and Outside
Slaveholders and slaves came together in the mansion, but today's visitors to Moticello learn far more about inanimate objects than
about the maids, valets, and other domestic slaves who worked there.
 - p. 352.

