
Notes and quotes from What's Your Enneatype? Understanding the Nine Personality Types for Personal Growth and
Strengthened Relationships, by Liz Carver and Josh Green, 2020.

Contents:
---------
[Included because they have *three* names for each type.]
Type One: The Improver/Reformer/Perfectionist
Type Two: The Helper/Giver/Befriender
Type Three: The Achiever/Performer/Motivator
Type Four: The Individualist/Romantic/Artist
Type Five: The Investigator/Observer/Theorist
Type Six: The Loyalst/Skeptic/Guardian
Type Seven: The Enthusiast/Optimist/Epicurean
Type Eight: The Challenger/Protector/Advocate
Type Nine: The Peacemaker/Mediator/Reconciler

Introduction: The Enneagram: What It Is and What It Isn't, pp. 7-23
-------------------------------------------------------------------
ABOUT THE COLORS

Finally, a note on the colors.  We use one unique color for each type, and these colors were not chosen at
random.  Here is some more information on each color and why we chose it.

The colors for ONEs are black and white.  ONEs see the world in black and white -- there is now ambiguity in how
they see anything.  ONEs are known to have a clear sense of right and wrong.  Black and white are clean, precise
colors, similar to how ONEs see the world in a logical, orderly way.  Black is a solid, strong, and consistent
color.  You can never go wrong wearing a black suit or a black dress.  This is similar to how healthy ONEs embody
consistency and decisiveness in a way that most other types do not.

The color for TWOs is blue.  In nature, blue is most commonly associated with the sky and the sea, which represents
TWOs in several ways.  Calm waters and clear blue skies demonstrate calmness, peace, and stability, which are
qualities that TWOs can embody.  The sky and sea can also bring about fierce storms, which is appropriate because
TWOs can love like a "mighty ocean," as the artist Sleeping at Last describes in the song "Two," moving mountains
to give the love needed to the people in their lives.  However, like a force of nature, TWOs can also disrupt
everyone else's apparent peace and calmness if they feel unappreciated or taken advantage of for too long, bringing
out a more chaotic storm.

The color for THREEs is orange.  THREEs are known to be engaging and winsome, so the vibrancy of orange captures
the way that many people are drawn to THREEs.  Orange is also associated with health and vitality (think fruits and
vitamin C), which speaks to the productivity and efficiency of THREEs.  Finally, while THREEs are known to have
strong, confident personalities, they are also known to constantly adapt to their environment so that they can be
seen as successful, however that may look in any given situation.  Thus, THREEs are represented by a secondary
color that, while bright and strong, is not a primary color all by itself.

The color for FOURs is purple.  Purple is one of the rarest naturally occurring colors, which is perfect for our
FOUR friends who love to be known and understood as individuals.  Purple is a secondary color, a mixture of the
coolness of blue and vibrancy of red.  Purple itself can be used both as a cool color and a warm color, which is
similar to how FOURs can experience the dramatic oscillation of deep "hot and cold" feelings all the time.  In the
ancient Near East, purple represented wealth and royalty and was saved for only the finest of clothes and other
goods.  It is the unicorn of colors, and FOURs are the unicorn of types.
[page break]

The color for FIVEs is green.  FIVEs are observant and prone to take in information with their eyes, and eyes can
recognize more shades of green than any other color.  Green is also the most restful color for human eyes to view,
and many schools and institutions are painted green to calm nerves and anxieties.  FIVEs tend to run out of energy,
so a restful color caters to their need to recharge.  Green is often used to bring balance to the primary colors
when they are being used in a way that is either too warm or too cool, which speaks to the objectivity and non-
dualism that FIVEs embody.

The color for SIXes is brown.  Brown is one of two neutral colors.  Neutral should not be read as "boring," because
SIXes are anything *but* bland.  There is quite a variety of browns in the world, from bronze to coffee to mahogany
to chestnut to khaki to sand.  Look at the subtypes and you will see that out of all of the numbers, SIXes have the
most variety among the three different instincts.  The very ground that supports us, both indoors and outdoors, is
often brown, not unlike how SIXes in health provide support and stability for the people in their lives.  Brown is
not a loud, vibrant color; rather, it is adaptable and goes with any environment.

The color for SEVENs is .

The color for EIGHTs is .
[page break]

The color for NINEs is .
- pp. 21-23.

