
Notes and quotes from Ageing, A Very Short Introduction, by Nancy A. Pachana, 2016.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Chapter 1 - A brief history
---------------------------
Medicine in ancient times was characterized by a belief that imbalance in the organism,
particular of the four 'humours' (blood, yellow bile, black bile, and phlegm), resulted
in illness.  Although many thinkers at that time, including Aristotle and Galen, believed
that a creeping 'dryness' in the body upset the balance of humours an could lead to illness
and decay, it was also balance in the exercise of physical as well as sensory desires.
- p. 6.

For example, in many societies, *gerocomy,* the belief that intercourse with younger women
could delay or even reverse ageing, was common.  And unfortunately, this belief persists in
sub-Saharan Africa, where sex with younger women in pursuit of health benefits has contributed
to the spread of HIV and AIDS.
- p. 13.  [Emphasis in original as italics.]

Much less optimistic is the 16th-century German description of the decades of life:
- 10 years -- a child
- 20 years -- youth
- 30 years -- a man
- 40 years -- standing still
- 50 years -- settled and prosperous
- 60 years -- departing
- 70 years -- protect your soul
- 80 years -- the world's fool
- 90 years -- the scorn of children
- 100 years -- God have mercy
- p. 16.

In modern gerontology there is a distinction made between the 'young-old' (aged 65-74), 'old-old'
(aged 75-84), and 'oldest-old' (aged 85+).  There is renewed interest in studying this latter group,
particularly as globally, longevity increases on average by about three months per year, or about
five hours per day.
- p. 16.

Chapter 2 - Physical and biological aspects of ageing
-----------------------------------------------------
Changes in the organism on a biological, psychological, and social level, evolving primarily as a
result of the passage of chronological time, are the definition of *primary ageing.*  Primary ageing
changes include wear and tear on organs as a result of their use over time, and we can do very little
to slow or reverse such changes.  Examples of changes in human biology as a function of primary ageing
include decreased productionf of neurotransmitters, the chemical messengers of the brain, as well as a
decreased sensitivity of neural receptors in the brain to receive such messages (see Table 2 for more
such examples of primary and secondary ageing effects).  Note that the magnitude of declines in such
primarly ageing changes are relatively stable across the lifespan, but their cumulative effect may
become more noticeable as we age.
*Secondary ageing* is, by contrast, the term for changes in the organism that are a result of a
disease process, as well as damage [page break] to the organism due to life events, such as experience
of head trauma; and the results of lifestyle choices, such as diet and exercise.  Examples of secondary
ageing effects include the development of cardiac disease or Alzheimer's disease.  Whereas changes due
to primary ageing are more universal and largely unavoidable, those due to secondary ageing do not affect
all persons, and are often amenable to interventions and in many cases also to prevention.  There are
some grey areas in between primary and secondary ageing: for example, when does wear and tear on joints
and cartilage (primary ageing) become arthritis (secondary ageing)?  Unfortunately, with increased age
our ability to bounce back from illness or other forms of physical or emotional strain declines.  Thus
preventative strategies in later life are important, and have as their goal maintaining health and
functional capacity for longer before declines occur.
- pp. 23-24  [Emphasis in original as italics.].

A key element of this theory is the idea of *scaffolding.*  The older individual compensates for
decrements in cognitive functioning by recruiting, in essence, additional brain power from more
intact portions of the brain, ones less affected by the ageing process.  For example, older adults
routinely use both sides of their brain to complete tasks for which younger adults use only one
hemisphere.  This harnessing of additional cognitive functioning coupled with experience contributes
to the finding that older adults often show superior performance on problems requiring complex,
relativistic thinking, particularly those demanding recognition of diverse perspectives or the synthesis
of contradictory information.  STAC-r shows the brain to be a dynamic organ that can adapt to changes in
its functioning as a result of the ageing process.
- p. 33.  [Emphasis in original as italics.]

Dementia does not affect all adults or even a majority of older adults.  For persons over age 65, in
most developed and developing countries, approximately 6-8 per cent of individuals will have some form of
dementia.  For individuals over 80, approximately [page break] 20-25 per cent will have some form of
dementia.  Women are at greater risk of developing dementia, and this is particularly true in very advanced
old age, but how much of this is due to women's longer lifespan is a matter of debate in the literature.
However, in all cases, dementia is not a part of normal or primary ageing but represents a neurological
disease (secondary ageing) characterized by distinct changes in the brain.
- pp. 33-34.

If changes persist over time or are quite acute (suggesting some acute causative event such as a stroke),
the consultation with a health professional is warranted.  If changes in thinking, emotions, or behaviours
begin to impact daily life and particularly familiar tasks, such as way-finding (i.e. getting lost in
familiar places), then seeking professional advice is probably warranted.
- p. 35.

Exercise and physical activity, as well as minimizing times of inactivity such as sitting, are also
important for general health as well as cognitive and emotional well-being, and certainly contribute to
lowering the risk of dementia.
- p. 37.

Chapter 3 - The Psychology of ageing
------------------------------------
For example, the general Body Mass Index (BMI) guidelines were found to be overly restrictive when applied
to older persons, in that slightly higher than recommended BMI levels appeared protective (rather than a
risk) for health in older individuals.
- p. 47.

The *disengagement theory of ageing,* one of the first theories of ageing proposed by modern gerontologists,
held that older people need to withdraw from society as they age, and that this is of benefit to the older
individual as well as society; the older [page break] individual will not become overwhelmed, and younger
members of society can surge forward.  In contrast, the *activity theory of ageing,* formulated in response to
the disengagement theory of ageing, proposed that remaining active and socially engaged contributes to successful
ageing.  The *continuity theory of ageing,* which posits that older adults usually maintain the same activities
and interaction patterns in later life as they did earlier in life, attempting to maintain this activity by
adapting strategies connected to their past experiences and circumstances, is a later elaboration upon the
activity theory of ageing.
- pp. 48-49.  [Emphasis in original as italics.]

In another study, receiving larger amounts [page break] of social support was found to be less important to
positive well-being in older persons than providing support to others.  Receiving support is associated with
dependency, while providing social support is seen as socially productive -- a more positive 'identity.'
- pp. 51-52.

Group membership has been linked to improved health and functioning, with levels of well-being higher amongst
 those who belonged to the greater number of groups.
- p. 52.

While personality had been thought to be relatively stable in later life, new research demonstrates that
personality traits can and do change throughout life, and that such changes can be substantial.  For example,
both cross-sectional and longitudinal research has shown that older adults tend to score higher on agreeableness
and conscientiousness, and lower on extraversion, neuroticism, and openness, than younger individuals.  It is
important to note that, of course, such studies are reporting on population changes and averages, and that
individuals can change to a greater or lesser extent than is represented by such averages.  With respect to
later life, research demonstrates that older people retain the capacity to change patterns of thoughts, feelings,
and behaviours.  Findings from centenarian studies suggest that extraversion and a tendency to reach out to others
is characteristic of persons who attain this great age.
Personality traits have been associated with both more and less successful ageing outcomes.  For instance,
possessing the personality trait of conscientiousness, which can include a sense of responsibility, self-control,
and traditionalism, has, in several studies, been associated with greater longevity.  Higher levels of neuroticism,
which can include greater emotional reactivity and the tendency to interpret situations as threatening, is associated
with greater risk of experienceing poor physical and mental health.
- p. 59.

Chapter 4 - Social and interpersonal aspects of ageing
------------------------------------------------------
One common factor across cultures is the experience of feeling younger than one's chronological age, which has been
demonstrated in several studies internationally.  Also, the older one is, the greater the gap between one's actual age
and how old one feels.  Typically, after age 65 people generally feel about ten years younger than their chronological
age.  Despite varying context and circumstances, largely individual factors -- particularly physical and mental
well-being, both objective and subjective -- contribute to one's subjectively imagined age.  Finally, a longitudinal
study found that the higher the person's subjective age the higher their chance of experiencing poor health and higher
mortality, even after adjusting for multiple potential contributing factors.  In other words, the closer our perceived
and actual ages are, the worse off we are likely to be.
- p. 77.

Chapter 5 - Positive and successful ageing
------------------------------------------
Rowe and Kahn (1998), in their book Successful Aging, [sic] define positive ageing as the ability to sustain three
important characteristics and behaviours, namely a low risk of disease and disease-related disability, a high level of
physical and mental functioning, and active engagement with life.  Other authors have added such diverse criteria as
social competence and productivity, personal control, and life satisfaction to this equation of healthy or productive
ageing.  However, due to researchers having varying definitions of successful ageing ... the proportion of older persons
classified as 'successfully ageing' varies enormously, from 3 per cent to 95 per cent, as reported in a review of the topic.
- p. 92.

Volunteering is an important role for some older adults, one which research supports as contributing to positive health
and well-being.  Volunteering may particularly benefit older persons who are more isolated or who experience declining
informal social contact.  Volunteering can improve social contact as well as provide engagement in a meaningful activity,
and has been shown to have positive effects on self-rated health, mood, increased life satisfaction, lower levels of
functional dependence and even decreased mortality.
- p. 93.

Seligman's (2003) 'Authentic Happiness Theory' posits three key facets to positive mental health and well-being: the
pleasurable life (positive emotions), the engaged life (flow and mindfulness), and the meaningful life (meaning and
[page break] purpose.  In 2011, Seligman revised his theory to include two additional components: positive relationships
and accomplishments.
- pp. 93-94.

Chapter 6 - Reflections on ageing and future directions
-------------------------------------------------------
By 2050, there will be one million centenarians in the USA, and numbers of centenarians and supercentenarians (individuals
over age 100 and 110, respectively) are rising across the developed and developing world.  Centenarian and supercentenarian
studies provide increasing insights into function and well-being in very advanced old age.  Research has shown that 30-40
per cent of a contemporary cohort of nonagenarians is independent from age 92-100 years.  In a comparable study of thirty-
two US supercentenarians (aged 110-119 years), about 40 per cent of participants needed minimal assistance or were independent,
implying that supercentenarians are not more disabled than people in their ninth decade.  Such studies do not paint a picture
of the fourth age as one of inevitable dependence and poor quality of life.
- p. 110.

