
Quotes from Infectious Disease - A Very Short Introduction, by Marta L. Wayne and Benjamin M. Bolker, 2015
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Both the encounter and compatibility filters must be open in order for successful transmission to occur.
Public health measures can close the encounter filter and are especially important in the early stages of
an epidemic.  Drugs or vaccines can close the compatibility filter, but they are not always available.
 - p. 14.

Once a person is infected with HIV, they may live for many years without showing any symptoms, but are
still capable of transmitting the virus.  After some time following the initial infection (usually
several years), the virus population within the infected person begins to increase rapidly, ultimately
causing immune system collapse.  The HIV positive person then becomes vulnerable to opportunistic infections
(see Chapter 2) -- infections caused by disease agents such as the bacterium *Pneumocystis carinii,* which
causes pneumonia, or the fungus *Candida albicans;* neither of these pathogens can infect a person with a
normally functioning immune system.  Certain types of cancer, such as Kaposi's sarcoma, also occur more
frequently in people living with AIDS.  Untreated, HIV infections are usually fatal within five to ten
years.  The proximate cause of death is usually opportunistic infection, rather than HIV per se.
 - p. 41.

As discussed before, mutations are random; the probability of a given mutationis proportional to the number
of genomes available to mutate.  It is therefore critical to respond quickly to initial zoonotic events in
order to limit the total mutation rate by keeping the number of human infections small.
 - p. 52.

Since malaria is so widespread and can have such deadly effects, it may be one of the strongest selective
forces shaping thehuman genome in the past few thousand years.
 - p. 72.

While quinine can cure malaria, it is too expensive and too toxic to give it to everyone in the population
regardless of whether they have malaria or not.  Whenever possible, it's cheaper and safer to prevent
disease by closing the encounter filter to block transmission rather than trying to close the compatibility
filter once transmission has already happened.  This idea applies to many diseases.  Low-tech solutions like
monogamy, or condoms, or clean needles, or hand sanitizer, or special water containers, work better (if you
can get people to use them) than the best vaccines and treatments.
 - p. 74.

The simplest way to minimize the impact of disease is to minimize its incidence in the first place.
 - p. 101.

