
Quotes from Viruses - A Very Short Introduction, by Dorothy H. Crawford, 2011, 2018
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The whole structure is called a *virion* and the outer coat is caled the *capsid.*  Capsids come in various
shapes and sizes, each characteristic of the virus family to which it belongs.  They are built up of protein
subunits called *capsomeres* and it is the arrangement of these ar ound the central genetic material that
determins the shape of the virion.  For example, pox viruses are brick-shaped, herpes viruses are icosahedral
(twenty-sided spheres), the rabies virus is bullet-shaped, and the tobacco mosaic virus is long and thin like
a rod (Figure 1).  Some viruses have an outer layer surrounding the capsid called an *envelope.*
Most viruses are too small to be seen under a light microscope.  In general, they are around 100 to 500 times
smaller than bacteria, varying in size from 20 to 300 nanometres in diameter (nm; 1 nm is a thousand millionth
of a metre) (Figure 2.)
 - p. 5.  [Emphasis in original as italics.]

The emergence of almost all recent novel flue viruses has been traced to China where they circulate freely among
animals kept in cramped conditions in farms and live bird markets.  In the years since H5N1 bird flu has emerged,
several other virulent bird flu viruses have been recognized, all containing the H5 gene but with various different
N genes, now all refered to as H5Nx, the highly pathogenic avia influenza (HPAI) viruses.  Their transmissibility
to humans is low, but the threat of a human pandemic remains as a genetic drift or shift could at any time generate
a human transmissible virus.
- p. 46.

Man modern-day lifestyle factors increase our risk of emerging infections, and most of these are linked to
overpopulation.  The world's population approximately doubled every 500 years between the beginning of the Christian
era and 1900, when it reached 1.6 billion.  But in the 20th century, life expectancy rose steeply and the population
quadrupled, hitting 6 billion by 2000.  If this growth rate continues unabated, we are set to reach 9-10 billion by
2100.
A population of this size brings many problems, not least diminishing natural resources, increasing pollution, loss
of biodiversity, ang global warming.  But as far as emerging viruses are concerned, the most acute problem is
literally lack of space.  We have already seen how invading the territories of wild animals, be it to chop down the
rainforest, hunt for food, or extend our cities, risks acquiring unknown, sometimes lethal, viruses.  With over 50
percent of us now living in megacities, like Tokyo with over 35 million inhabitants, viruses, once acquired, can
easily spread between us.
- p. 47.

Rotaviruses are a major cause of gastroenteritis globally, particularly targeting children under 5.  The disease
varies in severity but usually lasts four to seven days, with the main problem being dehydration.  Indeed, rotaviruses
cause over 600,000 infant deaths a year worldwide, mostly in developing countries where the viruses spread easily and
emergency rehydration procedures are not always available.  With up to a hundred billion (10^11) virus particles in
each millilitre of faeces produced by an infected child, and only ten virus particles required to pass the infection
on, it is not surprising that rotavirus outbreaks are frequent and difficult to control.
- p. 70.

Also, many strains of rotavirus cause gastroenteritis in young animals such as calves, piglets, lambs, foals, chickens,
and rabbits, which can act as rotavirus reserviors.
- p. 70.

Noroviruses are the second most common cause of viral gastroenteritis after rotaviruses, producing a milder disease of
shorter duration.  These viruses account for around 23 million cases of gastroenteritis every year, with epidemics
commonly centering on nursing homes, hospitals, and children's nurseries, camps, and schools.  Unusually, immunological
memor to noroviruses tends to be short, so epidemics affect adults as well as children.
- p. 71.

Worldwide, 10-20 per cent of human cancers are linked to viruses, including some common tumours like cervical cancer in
women and liver cancer, which is more common in men.  So far, all the human tumour viruses discovered are persistent
viruses that successfully evade their hosts' immune attack and remain on board long term.
- p. 95.

Paradoxically, as the incidence of wild polio infection declined, the relative risk of vaccine-related polio caused by
mutant vaccine virus rose, so that now most cases of paralytic polio are caused by the vaccine strain.  Also, with the
vaccine strain of polio virus circulating in the community, it is not possible to completely eradicate the virus.  For
these reasons, the policy now is to revert to using the inactivated vaccine worldwide in order to achieve complete
eradication.
- p. 117.

At the present time, while global eradication of measles is ongoing, and infection is a rare event in the developed
world, some may think that with a one in a million risk of vaccine-associated encephalitis, it is safer not to vaccinate.
Nevertheless, if enough people argue this way and the level of vaccination falls below the critical level of 80 per cent,
then measles epidemics will reappear, leading inevitably to deaths.
This is exactly what happened in the UK after a report appeared in the medical journal *The Lancet* in 1998 suggesting a
link between measles vaccination and childhood autism.  The puublicity this received caused an immediate downturn in
measles vaccinations and, despite the link being refuted and eventually disproved, it took twelve years for the report's
senior author to be found guilty of dishonesty and flouting ethics protocols and be struck off the UK Medical Register.
In the meantime, the virus re-established itself, causing measles epidemics and deaths.
- p. 118.

- p. 118.

