
Notes and Quotes From Whistleblower, My Journey to Silicon Valley and Fight for Justice at Uber, 2020.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: this book has no Table of Contents nor an Index.  Also, all chapters are untitled.

Prologue
Over the years, I have often thought of a quotation from the philosopher Isaiah Berlin's "Two Concepts of Liberty":
"I wish my [page break] life and decisions to depend on myself, not on external forces of whatever kind.  I wish to
be the instrument of my own, not of other men's, acts of will.  I wish to be a subject, not an object; to be moved
by reasons, by conscious purposes, which are my own."
This book is the story of my journey to become the subject, not the object, of my own life -- to be the person who
*made things happen* rather than the woman who *had things happen to her.*
 - pp. 4-5. [Emphasis in original as italics.]

Chapter 1
At the time, there were seven of us: me; my father John; my mother, Cheryl; my three sisters, Elizabeth, Martha,
and Sara; and my little brother John.  After my two youngest brothers, Peter and Paul, were born....
 - p. 7.

Like our neighbors, we were very poor.  One year, I overheard my mother telling my father that they'd made five
thousand dollars that year -- a sum that sounded like a lot at the time, but now only reminds me of the level of
poverty I was raised in.
 - p. 8.

And I remember how, before we could afford to buy that electric piano, she [Susan's mother] made us a paper piano
out of poster [page break] board and permanent marker, and how she taught me to play that paper piano by singing
the notes of the paper keys whenever I touched them.
 - pp. 10-11.

My parents were fiercely Evangelical.  The Holy Spirit was very real to them, as were spiritual warfare and speaking
in tongues.
 - p. 11.

Even as I dreamed of becoming a writer and an architect, the [page break] dream that truly felt within my grasp was
becoming a professional violinist.  After all, I thought, there was nothing to prevent a poor girl from playing the
violin, as long as she had a violin and worked hard enough at it.
 - pp. 15-16.

[Susan was homeschooled, and when her mother started working and could no longer homeschool her, she found out she was
too old to attend public school.]
I daydreamed about being able to go to school, and built an elaborate fantasy in my head about having a locker in which
to put my books and school supplies, having friends to play and gossip with, having homework to do at night, having
sports teams to play on and extracurricular activities to do.  School sounded like heaven to me.
 - p. 19.

As I sat there among the books that I had been reading for the last few years, thinking about the stories that they told
of great people and the great things they had done, it suddenly occurred to me: these were stories about people who had
*done things* in their lives, not had things *done to them,* who had *made things happen* in their lives, not had things
*happen to them.*
In that moment, I thought of Epictetus, a Greek slave who became one of the greatest ancient philosophers, who taught that
anyone could have a meaningful and fulfilling life if they focused their energy on changing only the things that were in
their power to change and finding peace with (or ignoring) the things in their life that they had no power over.
 - p. 24. [Emphasis in original as italics.]

Chapter 2
My plan had worked.  I was eighteen years old, enrolled as a freshman at Arizona State University, with a full scholarship
to my name and the opportunity to learn anything ane everything I'd ever dreamed of.
 - p. 29.

When I saw him [her father], I felt my heart stop....  He passed away early the next morning.
 - p. 33.

All the philosophy books I'd read and studied over the past several years had given me a solid foundation, and soon I was
taking advanced graduate courses in philosophy alongside the requirements for my major.  Sitting in those classes, learning
about epistemology and ethics and logic, I began to piece together in my mind a picture of the world that finally made sense
to me.  I'd gone through my whole life feeling that I didn't understand the way the world worked, why people acted the way
they did, or what life was supposed to be about, but in those classes, I finally began to find some answers.
 - p. 38.

By the spring of 2014, I was on track to graduate with three degrees: a BA in physics, a BA in philosophy, and an MA in
philosophy.
 - p. 54.

Chapter 4
At the end of the spring semester, a new student named Tim joined the [physics] department [at Penn].  He seemed to have
trouble fitting in, so I reached out to him, hoping I could help him become part of the group.
 - p. 55.

One night, efter several weeks of occasional conversation, Tim texted me a photo.  In the photo, he was cutting one of his
arms open, and his arm was bleeding.
 - p. 55.

The message Tim's advisor and the department chair were sending was clear: *Even the City of Philadelphia believes you are
responsible for Tim.*
 - p. 57. [Emphasis in original as italics.]

I decided to go along with their plan, to keep trying to help Tim and hope that things would get better.
 - p. 58.

One night, Tim told me he had romantic feelings for me and asked me if I had feelings for him.  When I told him that I didn't,
he said he was going to kill himself.  This time, it seemed real.  I called the police.
 - p. 58.

I escalated the situation to the dean of graduate studies.
 - p. 61.

"If I were you," she [the dean] said, "I would sue the school.  Is that what you want to do?"  I shook my head.
"I don't want to sue anyone," I said.  "I just want to graduate with all of my degrees and go to graduate school."  I told her
I wanted to file two complaints: a complaint about Tim... and a complaint against the school.
 - p. 62.

She never filed either complaint.  And instead of helping me, she enacted further retaliation against me.  She rescinded my
master's degree in philosophy, on the grounds that I had withheld information from her....
 - p. 63.

After my meeting at the Office of the Vice Provost, I did some research on the laws that existed to protect students from
this kind of misteatment and spent hours reading about Title IX....  The more I read about it, the more I realized how insane
the whole situation had become, realized that Penn had been gaslighting me the entire time.  *Of course* there were laws that
protected me from the treatment I was experiencing: Penn just didn't want me to know about them.
 - p. 66. [Emphasis in original as italics.]

Horrified, I contacted the local bar association, which referred me to a handful of civil rights lawyers....  Most important,
they all said, *don't sue Penn.*
 - p. 67. [Emphasis in original as italics.]

I took the lawyers' advice and decided to move on with my life.  But before I did, I carefully documented everything, saving
every email, every call log, every text message.
 - p. 67.

My heart broke when I realized that moving on meant giving up on my dream.  The professors I'd been counting on for letters of
recommendation now refused to talk to [page break] me because of the situation with Tim, and without the recommendation letters
I needed, I knew I would never be accepted into a physics PhD program.  So I trashed my graduate school applications and, with
them, my hopes of becoming a physicist.
 - pp. 67-68.

When I reflect on what happened, I see two different paths I could have taken.  If I had given in to Penn's intimidation
tactics much earlier in the process, perhaps I could have obviated the need for them to retaliate against me....  If I had
done all these things, there's a chance that I would be at Caltech or Cornell or the University of Arizona right now, finishing
up a PhD in physics.  This scenario would have produced the outcome I wanted, but I still would have done the wrong thing.
[page break]
Or, I could have done the opposite: I could have refused to let them intimidate me from the very beginning; I could have said
no and fought back....  I could have hired a lawyer or gone to the press and shared my story with the world.  Looking back, I
believe that was the objectively right thing for me to do.  And I wish with all my heart that I had done it.
Since leaving Penn, I've met many women who have experienced similar mistreatment in academic departments....  To this day, I
feel a pang of guilt on my conscience whenever I hear these stories.
 - pp. 68-69.

All I know is this: I didn't speak up, because I was afraid.  I didn't do what I knew was right, because I was afraid.  And I
vowed that I would never make the same mistake again.
 - p. 69.

I suspected that the leap from physics into software engineering wouldn't be that difficult for me.  Because I already knew
how to code, the only things I'd need to figure out in order to qualify for a job were the basics of computer science.
 - p. 71.

My favorite [tech interview] was a phone interview with Chad Rigetti, the CEO and founder of a three-person quantum computing
startup called Rigettie Quantum Computing, which was based in Berkeley, California.  Chad was a physicist who was building
computers that harnessed the power of quantum mechanics.
 - p. 71.

[Fowler married Chad Rigetti in 2017.]
 - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Susan_Fowler

I really wanted the job at Rigetti Quantum Computing.  It seemed perfect for me.  But much to my dismay, the company never
scheduled a second interview....  [A]fter a few weeks I gave up and moved on.
 - p. 72.

Chapter 5
During my time at Penn, I'd read something by the sociologist C. Wright Mills in which he had written, "The aim of the
college, for the individual student, is to eliminate the need in his life for the college; the task is to help him become a
self-educating man."
 - p. 81.

In the spring, I was put on call for Plaid's software systems, which meant I was the only engineer besides the system
administrator who was responsible for responding immediately if the system went down, at any time of the day or night.
 - p. 84.

I knew working like this wasn't sustainable.  And, as far as I could tell, I was the only one who was working this way....
One day, I overheard some of my male coworkers discussing their salaries, and I learned they were making around fifty
thousand dollars more each year than I was, even though they worked fewer hours.
 - p. 85.

Long before I started working as a software engineer, I had grown accustomed to fear, accustomed to hate.  I was used to
people hating me and mistreating me because of my Jewish background, for my sex, for my sexual orientation, for my social
class.  I didn't understand it; I couldn't figure out why people harbored so much hatred in their hearts.
 - p. 91.

I wanted to be judged not for arbitrary properties about myself that I couldn't change, but by the kind of person that I
was: by my work and accomplishments, by my character.
 - p. 92.

Chapter 7
I was the first to arrive [at a "Private meeting" with someone from HR at Uber].... a brunette woman walked in the door and
introduced herself as Jessica.  She explained she was part of a newly formed "harassment task force" at Uber.
 - p. 136.

But then she said something I hadn't heard before, something that shook me to my core: "Actually," she said, raising her
eybrows, "all of the other employees were hear to talk about *you.*'
I felt panicked, afraid, and embarrassed.  I felt my face grown hot and knew it had turned bright red....  I endured the
rest of the meeting in a daze, walked outside, bought a pack of cigarettes, and sat on the curb outside the building, my
head in my hands and tears running down my face.
I felt so ashamed....  I had so many regrets about what happened at Penn....  Had I blinded myself to reality?  I racked
my brain for any warning signs I might have missed, red flags about my own judgment and discernment I might have ignored.
As I sat there, tryiing desperately to figure out what I'd done wrong, my phone began to buzz; several of my friends and
colleagues were asking how my meeting with HR had gone.  When I told them about my meeting, and about what Jessica had
told me -- that this was Jake's first offense; that nobody else had complained about Jake; that everyone else had been
there to complain about me instead -- they said she'd done the same thing to them, too.
From then on, we gave up all hope of HR ever taking action against Jake or any other manager or employee guilty of
bullying, [page break] discrimination, or harassment.
 - pp. 137-138. [Emphasis in original as italics.]

Chapter 8
I was proud of the work I was doing on the consulting team.  As teams began to re-architect and debug their code to
conform to the new company-wide production-readiness standards, we watched as the downtimes of their microservices hit
all-new lows.  Wondering if I could make the standardization process general enough that other companies could use it, I
obtained permission from Uber's legal department and my managers to share my work with other companies in Silicon Valley.
When they, too, found great success from using it, I got a contract with O'Reilly Media -- the top publisher of software
engineering books -- to turn it into a book.
I was thrilled.  I couldn't believe I had a book deal, that I was about to fulfill my lifelong dream of becoming a writer.
 - p. 147.

Uber's success was due, in large part, to its aggressive disregard for the law; Travis Kalanick and his team were operating
it in cities across the world without permission, unashamedly breaking and disregarding laws and regulations -- all in the
name of "hustle" and "disruption."  Unfortunately, as I experienced firsthand that spring and summer, the aggression that
had precipitated Uber's meteoric rise was also directed at the lowest-ranking employees in [page break] the comany.
Disregarding laws, rules, and regulations was so entrenched in Uber's culture that managers within the companuy seemed to
believe that various rules -- including employment law and basic human decency -- no longer applied to them.  Berating
employees, insulting them, mocking them, and threatening them were all commonplace behaviors that went unpunished.
 - pp. 148-149.

It was generally understood that the entire mess came from the very top; it seemed that Travis Kalanick and Thuan Pham
liked watching their employees fight against each other.
 - p. 150.

Beyond the discrimination, mistreatment, and power struggles, the pace of work was intense and relentless.
[It is here where she mentions the irony of having stacks of Arianna Huffington's book, about the importance of sleep,
in the offices of Uber.]
 - p. 151.

The abuse that I endured from my managers grew worse with every passing day.  I dreaded going into work, knowing that I'd be
yelled at in meetings, that I'd be told I wasn't "doing my job," that I wasn't "working hard enough," even though I was doing
everything that my managers asked of me.  I wasn't the only one who felt this way.  When I told my friends on the site
reliability [page break] engineering teams what was going on, they said they had the same problems with their managers and
teams, too.  Almost every single one of them had started seeing a therapist for anxiety or depression related to the culture of
work at Uber; the engineers who'd been at Uber the longest all seemed to have suicidal thoughts.  This scared me, because I
was starting to develop anxiety and PTSD from my work, too, and I didn't want my mental health to get worse.
 - pp. 153-154.

I was a shy, introverted person, and I hated confrontation.  In order to survive in Uber's aggressive culture, I had to shut
off the sensitive side of myself and be far more aggressive (and defensive) than I felt comfortable with....  I didn't like
who I was becoming.
 - p. 155.

Eventually, I stopped fighting back, because I had nothing left in me....  Instead, I just took the abuse, then headed straight
to the bathroom after each meeting, where I stood inside one of the empty stalls and cried.
 - p. 155.

My coworkers who were being mistreated were white, black, Hispanic, Asian, male, female, gay, straight -- *everyone,* was being
bullied.  One of my friends said his therapist was begging him to quit before something terrible happened.
 - p. 160. [Emphasis in original as italics.]

After the summer performance review season came to a close, I came into work one day to learn that one of my coworkers, a black
man named Joseph Thomas who had been bullied by his manager, was dead.  I later learned that he'd shot himself in his car and,
by the time his wife found him, it was too late.  Before he committed suicide, he had told one of his friends that Uber was
breaking him down.  "The sad thing is this place (Uber) has broken me to the point where I don't have the strength to look for
another job," his friend [Carolyn Said, in an article entitled "Suicide of an Uber Engineer: Widow Blames Job Stress"] told the
San Francisco Chronicle, repeating his words.
 - p. 164.

Chapter 9
The words of the Stoics reinforced what I already knew: I couldn't control what others did to me, but I could control how I reacted.
 - p. 168.

On my way home that night, I walked down the street to the BART station and shoved my Uber-branded leather jacket into the trash.
I was fuming.  It had never been about the jackets; it was about the bullying, the harassment, the discrimination, and the
retaliation that my collegues and I were constantly subjected to.
 - p. 177.

Chapter 10
I wanted to do what was right, and not just what was right for me, but what was *objectively* right.
 - p. 202. [Emphasis in original as italics.]
*And how on earth,* I thought, *could moral obligation really be determined by what brings about the best consequences, if you
could never know what the consequences would be?*
 - p. 202. [Emphasis in original as italics.]

I knew what was just, I knew what was truthful, I knew what was courageous, I knew what was right.  Standing up against
injustice was right.  Refusing to give in to fear was right.  Telling the truth was right.  These things were right in every
circumstance, regardless of the consequences.
I knew what I had to do.  I had to speak up.
 - p. 203.

I wrote the entire blog post, from start to finish, in less than an hour.  Every word was deliberate, every sentence
cautiously, purposefully composed.

Chapter 12
It's difficult to put into words how all of this felt.  How it felt when friends told me they might have said too much
to a private investigator.  How it felt to read emails from reporters asking me to comment on something disparaging about
myself or my husband that wasn't true, and not being able to say anything because I didn't want to be fired or jeopardize
the investigation.  How it felt to be [page break] followed everywhere I went.  How it felt to live in constant fear. It
was hell.  I felt like I had died and the sum of my life was being examined by a judte who knoew only every stupid or
foolish or wrong thing that I had ever done and every rumor that had ever been spread about me, and refused to take into
account any of the good or the truth.  But I couldn't see the judge, couldn't see who was trying to destroy me....  Some
days, the anxiety, fear, and horror of it got so bad that I would curl up into a ball on the floor and cry until I felt
numb....  Part of what felt so scary was the randomness of it all: I never knew what to expect.
 - pp. 224-225.

Chapter 13
In the years that followed, I tried my best to stay out of the news.  I'd learned very quickly after the blog post that I
was too shy and too introverted to be a public figure; I found all of the media attention overwheming.
 - p. 244.

