
 Quotes from Aesthetics, A Very Short Introduction, by Bence Nanay, 2019.
==========================================================================

Chapter 1 - Lost in the Museum
------------------------------
Non-elitist aesthetics
....
The experiences that aesthetics talks about come on a spectrum.  We care
more about some experiences more than others.  Not just the experience of
artworks in a museum or of an opera performance.  Also the experience of
the autumn leaves in the park on our way home after work or even just the
light of the setting sun falling on the kitchen table.  But aesthetics is
also about your experience when you choose the shirt you're going to wear
today or when you wonder whether you should put more pepper in the soup.
Aesthetics is everywhere.  It is one of the most important aspects of our life.
- p. 2.

Chapter 2 - Sex, drugs, and rock 'n' roll
-----------------------------------------
Beauty?
The most widely shared take on aesthetics is that it's about beauty.
Just look around on the street -- the word `aesthetics' routinely shows up
in beauty salons....  The general thought is that some things are beautiful
others are not.  Aesthetics helps us to keep them apart....

I call this the `beauty-salon approach' because in cosmetic surgery or the
nail business there are fairly clear conceptions of what is beautiful and
what is not.  In fact, the main aim is to turn something not-so-beautiful
into something more beautiful....

The beauty-salon approach solves the sex, drugs, and rock 'n' roll problem
with little effort.  Aesthetic experiences are experiences of beautify things.
Drug-induced experiences or sexual experiences, or the experience of rock 'n'
roll, are not of beautiful things.  So they won't count as aesthetic.
- p. 8.

The point is that beauty is not a feature of objects that remains the same
at all times, in all contexts. for all observers....  [A]s Oscar Wilde
rightly noted, we sometimes see an object as beautiful sometimes we don't....
Even if beauty is in the eye of the beholder -- even if it is `objective' in
some sense, itis highly sensitive to what context we encounter it in.  The
beauty-salon approach can't explain this context-sensitivity.
- p. 9.

Pleasure?
....  The general thought is that aesthetics is about pleasure.  The
non-aesthetic is not....
Not all pleasure is aesthetic.
- p. 11.

Psychologists make a distinction between two kinds of pleasure.  The first
kind of pleasure is what you feel when something unpleasant stops.  I call
this `relief pleasure' because it is triggered by the body returning to its
normal state after a period of perturbation....

Relief pleasure is short-lived....

Contrast this with what I will call `sustaining pleasure.'  Sustaining
pleasure motivates us to keep on doing what we are doing -- it sustains
our activity....

Aesthetic pleasure is typically sustaining pleasure.
- p. 12.

Chapter 3 - Experience and attention
------------------------------------
The difference attention makes
Remember *Goldfinger?*  It wasw one of the better James Bond films (made
in 1964)....

It's an old film, but if you've seen it recently, say in the last couple of
years, it's impossible not to notice the uncanny resemblance between the look
of the villain Goldfinger and, well, the 45th president of the US.

Once you've seen this similarity, it's very difficult to unsee it.  And it
really messes with your mind when you watch the movie, especially given that
Goldfinger blows up the federal gold reserve in order to increase the value
of his own gold holdings.  For me, at least, this now takes a lot away from
the enjoyment of the film.
- p. 22.

Attending to the similarity between Goldfinger and Donald J. Trump can make
a huge difference....  This highlights the importance of which features of
the artwork we pay attention to.  Paying attention to an irrelevant feature
could and would derail our experience.
- p. 23.

This trick [revealing something at the end that changes everything] has been
widely used in feature films.  One way of getting the audience to spend even
more money on a film is to get them to watch it again.  And films of certain
aspirations do this by [page break] revealing something at the very end that
changes everything, so much so that, seeing the film for the second time,
knowing what you known now, will be a very different experience.  Christopher
Nolan's *Memento* (2000) and *Inception* (2010) are famous examples, but there
are many others.  You have very little idea what's going on until the end.
And when you see these films for the second time, you see them very differently,
because you attend to very different features of the story.
- .pp 26-27.

Chapter 4 - Aesthetics and the self

....  We take our aesthetic preferences to be a big part of who we are.

But these preferences change surprisingly quickly and often without us noticing.
According to some recent findings, aesthetic preferences are the most stable in
middle-aged people and they are much more fluid in younger and, somewhat
surprisingly, older age groups.  But even the aesthetic preferences of people in
the most stable age group undergo at least one major change as often as every two
weeks in an aesthetic domain they really care about.

We like to think that we don't change much.  Or if we do, we are in control of
this change.  But we are spectacularly wrong about this.  We have very little
control over how and how much we change.

Take the example of a widely explored psychological phenomenon, the `mere exposure
effect.'  The more you are exposed to something, the more you tend to like it.
Just the mere exposure to something changes your preferences.  And this happens
even if you are not aware of what you are exposed to.

The mere exposure effect influences your like of people, songs, colours, even
paintings.  In one experiment, a professor of psycholog at Cornell put some
seemingly random pictures among the slides for....
- p. 44.

Our aesthetic preferences in music, film, food, clothing, and art are super-
important for us, and they can and do change in a way that we have no control
over....  It happens under the radar.

If our preferences can be hijacked without us noticing, then a big part of who
we are seems to be the product of random mere exposure.  And we are defenceless
against this.
- p. 45.

Why judgements?
Hume (1711-1776), whose influence on Anglo-American philosophical aesthetics is
difficult to overstate, explicitly talks about the differences between the ways
two different people make judgements of taste.  He gives the following story as
an illustration (borrowed fom *Don Quixote*).  Two people drink from the same
wine and are asked to judge its quality.  One of them says it has a discernible
odd leathery taste.  The other one thinks it has an unpleasant metallic note.
The punchline of Hume's story is that while we might think that at least one of
these judgements is just plain wrong, when the wine was inspected, they
discovered a small key with a leather thong attached.  So they were both right.
- p. 53.

Going global
The vast majority of aesthetic traditions outside the `West' are not too
concerned with aesthetic judgements at all.  They are concerned with how our
emotions unfold, they way our perception is altered, and the way aesthetic
engagement interacts with social engagement.
- p. 54.

Chapter 5 - Aesthetics and the other
Aesthetic agreements and disagreements
It is somewhat unfortunate that the discussion of the social dimension of
aesthetics in the history of `Western' aesthetics has been dominated by one
question only, that of aesthetic agreements and disagreements.
- p. 56.

Here are two obvious options for settling disagreements of this kind.  We
can agree to disagree.  You like this, I like that.  Neither of us is right,
or, rather, we are both right.  The other option is that one of us is just
dead wrong.  The plausibility of these two options will depend on which
examples we pick.
- p. 57.

Compare aesthetic disagreements to disagreements about more prosaic things.
If we both look at a painting, and I say it's square shaped, while you say
it's triangle shaped, (at least) one of us is just mistaken.  But if we
look at the same painting and we disagree about its aesthetic qualities,
things are less clear.

Another comparison would be with clearly `subjective' disagreements.  If we
look at the same painting and I say it reminds me of my grandmother and you
say it does not remind you of your grandmother, then these two opinions are
consistent [page break] with each other (even if we have the same grandmother).
I'm right and you are also right.

The question is whether aesthetic disagreement is closer to the `square vs
triangle' disagreement or to the `reminds me of my grandmother or not'
disagreement.  And some of the central texts of `Western' aesthetics tried
to carve out an intermediate position between the purely `subjective'
disagreement (like the one involving my grandmother) and the purely
`objective' disagreement (like the one involving shapes).
- pp. 57-58.

Aesthetics is not for policing
It is not that a certain artwork just demands you to have a certain aesthetic
reaction.  Rather, when you have an aesthetic reaction, you implicitly assume
that everybody else has, or at least should have, the same reaction....

... this is one of the most arrogant ideas in the history of aesthetics.  If
you implicitly assume that everybody else should have the same reaction as
you do, then you seriously underappreciate the diversity of humankind and
the diversity of the cultural backgrounds people come from.  And any time we
are even tempted to think (or assume or feel) that whatever we do has universal
appeal or universal communicability, that would be a good time to stop and
exercise what I call `aesthetic humility' -- thinking about just how contingent
our own position and cultural background is compared to the vast diversity of
cultures on this planet.
- p. 63.

I used to work as a film critic.  One of the better aspects of the job was to
go to film festivals where I was often one of the jury members.  Being on a
jury at a film festival has its glamorous side -- meeting famous actors and
actresses, staying in fancy hotels, and so on.  But it was also sometimes an
exhausting and often infuriating experience.

You sit on a jury with four other people who are often from very different
parts of the world and have very different taste in film from yours.  But you
need to come to some kind of decision about which film should get the prize.
And there is always a strict deadline for doing so.  You have to give the
festval organizers a title by midnight.  It's already 11 pm and there is no
agreement about any of the films whatsoever.  This is aesthetic disagreement
in real life and resolving this disagreement is a task that Hume is not
exactly helping with.  After serving on juries a couple of times, the stale
debates about aesthetic disagreement started to look very different to me.

What is going on in these jury meetings is not about sharing experiences, it
is about hard aesthetic judgements.  We had to agree that one film is better
than the others.  In fact, the way it actually worked was usually the other
way round.  First, we had to agree that some films would clearly not win the
prize.  This was the easier part.  But then we were left with four or five
remaining films and that's when the knives came out.

How do you try to convince another critic rationally that the film she liked
was in fact derivative and cliched?  I'm afraid that the answer is that you
don't and you can't.  There was nothing rational about these debates.  And,
sadly, often the prize went to a film that none of the critics were crazy
about, but that all of us could live with as the prizewinner.
- p. 64.

We were days after having seen some of these films and what we could attend
to was not the film itself, but rather our recollection of the film.

Nonetheless, almost all the arguments were really ways of directing the other
critics' attention to some thus far unnoticed feature.  Attending to this
feature could make a negative aesthetic difference -- when the aim was to
dismiss this film.  But it could also make a positive aesthetic difference --
an argument for why this film is better than the rest of the field.

And this is in fact what critics should do, not only when they are on the jury,
but also when they write reviews.  This is what good critics actually do.
Not treating criticism as an art form, as Pauline Kael (1919-2001), the iconic
American film critic, did.  Not summarizing the plot.  Not telling their
childhood memories very loosely connected to the plot.  Not telling us what
they liked and what they didn't.  The critic's job is to direct our attention
to features we would not have noticed otherwise.  Attending to some of these
features can completely transform our experience.
- p. 65.


Chapter 6 - Aesthetics and life
How not to be jaded
I talked about the philosophical lessons that being a film critic taught me.
But being a film critic also has a pretty depressing size. [page break]
You have to spend a lot of time with other film critics, many of whom have
been in the job for many decades.

Maybe I was unlucky, but I had to spend a lot of time with film critics who
were incredibly jaded.  They said (often and loudly) how much they loved film,
but I saw very little trace of this.  They complained about every single film
we watched together, and even the ones they did not absolutely hate they only
saw through the angle of what they could say about them at the prize
deliberations or in their review.

The reason I gave up being a film critic and decided to live the much less
glamorous life of an academic is that I didn't want to be like them.  I did
not want to become jaded.  I did not want to forget how to be truly touched
and moved and lifted by a film or by other works of art.

But what did these people do wrong?  How did they become so jaded?  Take one
example: Ronnie (which may or may not be his real name).  Ronnie was English --
very English.  He wrote for one of the top British newspapers, but he also had
side-gigs in pretty much all of the quality print media of the United Kingdom.
He was not young.  He had spent his youth in Paris, hobnobbing in the literary
and film scene of the 1960s with the likes of Jeanne Moreau and Jean-Luc Godard.
This is what he rooted his entire identity as a film critic in: he was there at
this vibrant and exciting period of film history, getting drunk with actors on
the sets of films that now count as classics.

Ronnie and I ecame very ood friends in spite of our difference partly because
our tastes in art and film converged to a surprising degree.  But Ronnie
measured every contemporary film to his beloved classics, which is not a
particularly helpful attitude if you spend half of your life on the festival
circuit, where your job is to watch contemporary films.  And Ronnie's attitude
was not at all unusual among film critics: I have seen a lot of cultural
[page break] pessimism and the glorification of the past in these circles.
If these critics could get their kicks out of watching old films, but not new
ones, then they may have been wasting their time on the festival circuit.  But
maybe they were not jaded at all.  They just watched the wrong films.  Or so I
thought initially.

One night at the Chicago International Film Festival, after a particularly
difficult jury decision and a lot of Amaretto, Ronnie confessed that he no
longer got any pleasure out of seeing his old vavourites.  He said that
sometimes he understood some interesting connections to other films or noticed
some nuance that he could then write about in some review or article.  But he
no longer felt anything.  Ronnie, understandably, was pretty cut up about this.
And so was I.

Since then I've realized that this is a fairly widepsread phenomenon among
professional art critics and even art historians.  Ernst Gombrich (1909-2001),
probably the most widely known art historian of the 20th century, was in the
exact same predicament.  He could give a nuanced artistic and historical
analysis of pretty much any painting he looked at, but the whole experience
left him completely cold.

In fact, I was beginning to notice the signs of this in myself, with horror.  I
enjoyed watching films less and less, especially when I knew I had to write a
review about them.  And I have to admit that Ronnie was absolutely remarkable
in that after seeing a film, he could just sit down and write a first-rate,
sophisticated, and knowledgeable two-page review about it in ten minutes.  So,
I thought, maybe the price to pay for becoming a truly professional film critic
is that we have to stop enjoying films?  This possibility terrified me.  Maybe
this whole enjoyment-of-art thing is for amateurs only?  True professionals
don't waste time on that?

I don't think I have a good answer to these questions.  But my stint as a film
critic did teach me to see what it was that Ronnie and his [page break]
colleagues (and also, at least for some time, even myself) were doing: they
had very clear and fixed expectations about what they were going to see when
they sat down in the movie theatre.
- pp. 76-79.  [Note: this quote includes this entire section!]

Sweet, and not so sweet, expectations
....  Ronnie knew exactly what he could expect when the lights went off.  No
doubt, sometimes the film surprised him, but even if it did, it surprised him
in a predictable manner: `Aha, so the director chose a narrative twist that is
reminiscent of Hitchcock, not film noir!'  The space of possibilities of what
the film could do was already mapped out in his head at the very beginning.
- p. 79.

Of course, the more you know about film, the more patters of comparisons you
will have, and it is very difficult to do anything in film that has not been
done before.
- p. 80.

What is missing is some degree of openniess and willingness to let yourself
be genuinely surprised.  Not just surprised about which carefully delineated
film-historical pigeonhole the film ends up in.  But surprised about what the
film does to you.

The jaded film critic's attention is very much focused.  Ronnie will focus on
a couple of clearly defined features that he thinks will be relevant for his
review.  And he will ignore the rest.  And often rightly so, because the rest
will probably be pretty predictable.  But sometimes it will not be.  And Ronnie
will miss out on anything that happens outside the focus of his attention.
- p. 80.

The lingering effect
Here is another way in which the aesthetic colours our life.  Aesthetic
experiences can have a lingering effect.  This is one odd and underexplored
aspect of enjoying art: that it lingers.  Whe you spend an entire day in the
museum and you walk home afterwards, the drab bus top may look to you like one
of the pictures in the museum.  And when you're leaving a good concert or movie,
the ugly, grey, dirty streetscape can look positively beautiful.
- p. 84.

Art changes the way you attend.  And this attentional state of mind doesn't
stop just like that.  It lingers on.

Aesthetic experiences can make us ditch our preconceived way of making sense
of what we see.  When we're done with the art, our attentional freedom takes
some time to change back.  We keep on approaching whatever we see with open-
ended attention.  And this can lead to seeing the dirty sidewalk in front of
the cinema as a work of art.
- p. 85.


Chapter 7 - Global aesthetics
A global vocabulary
Nonetheless, every picture has pictorial organization: every picture organizes
the pictorial elements in a non-random [page break] manner.  And pictorial
organization is aesthetically significant in all cultures.  One of the key
concepts of Yoruba aesthetica (the aesthetic tradition of the people of South-
West Nigeria) is that of `ifarahon,' which is often translated as visibility --
as the requirement that all parts of the person are clearly formed and visible.
- pp. 93-94.

In the most detailed early work of Chinese aesthetics of painting, the
6th-century Chinese painter and critic Xie He outlined the six laws of painting.
The fifth one is about placing and arranging on the surface the pictorial elements
in space and depth (which became a central topic in all Chinese treatises on
paintings from then on).  The third Khanda of (Vishnudharmottara Purana, the
extremely detailed encyclopedic Hindu text on painting, written about the same
time, is also full of references to pictorial organization -- who should be behind
or next to or in front of whom.  And pictorial orgainzation has been a central
topic of Japanese aesthetics as well.
- p. 94.

The question all these works ask is how pictures are organized.  On a very
abstract level, there are two different and distinctive modes of pictorial
organization, which I call `surfac organization' and `scene organization'.
Every picture, regardless of where and when it was made, falls somewhere on
the spectrum betwen surface organization and scene organization.

Surface organization aims to draw attention to how the two-dimensional outline
shapes of the depicted objects are placed within the two-dimensional frame.
Scene organization, in contrast, aims to draw attention to how the three-
dimensional depected objects are placed in the depicted space.  There is a
trade-off between the two and most pictures are trying to combine [page break]
them.  But one -- either scene or surface organization -- tends to win out when
the two organizational principles are in conflict.
- pp. 94-95.

The distinction between scene organization and surface organization is somewhat
abstract.  So it would be helpful to substantiate this distinction with the help
of simpler features that are easier to spot.  I will focus on two such features:
occlusion and empty surface.

In everyday perception, we get a lot of occlusion: we see some objects behind or
in front of other objects.  The question is whether occlusion shows up in
pictures.  Surface organization implies that the picture maker pays attention to
whether there is occlusion or not: occlusion in a picture is a feature of how
two-dimensional outline shapes of the depicted objects are related to each other
on the two-dimensional surface.  Some pictures go out of their way to avoid
occlusion.  Some others pile on occlusions.  Both are good indications of
surface organization.  And we can place all pictures on a spectrum betwen
extreme lack of occlusion and extreme seeking out of occlusion.  Figures 7
[Scythian wall-hanging, 5th centure BCE, Pazyryk, Altai (Siberia)] and 8
[Hanegawa Toei, *Procession of Korean Mission in Edo, c.1748 (Japan)] are two
examples that are close to the two end points.

Pictures from some cultures will cluster around specific points of this occlusion
spectrum.  The Scythian pictures of Pazyryk, for example, tend to avoid occlusion
at almost all costs.  In Hanegawa [page break] Toei's image, almost everything
seems to be deliberately occluded.  Both of these types of pictures would count
as having surface organization.

Pictures of some other cultures (for example, Plane Native American carvings or
Dutch still life paintings from the 17th century), in contrast, are not
particularly bothered y the presence or lack of occlusion -- this is an
indication of scene organization: if a picture is organized in terms of the
three-dimensional scene it depects, then neither occlusion nor the lack of
occlusion will be particularly important.

The second feature that every picture has is the presence or absence of empty
surface.  In everyday perception, some of our visual field is often empty in the
sense that there are no perceptually interesting elements there -- only the sky,
the ground, [page break] an empty wall.  Some pictures deliberately try to avoid
empty surface: they try to put pictorially interesting elements on every square
inch of the surface.  Others deliberately seek out empty surfaces.  Some examples
are found in Figures 9 and 10.
- p. 95-100.

- p. 95.
- p. 95.

