
Notes and Quotes from Cezanne's Composition, Analysis of His Form With Diagrams and Photographs of His Motifs, by Erle Loran, 1943.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: This book really helped me understand how Cezanne inspired the Cubists!  In particular, the photographs of his motifs -- especially
those of The Sainte Victoire mountain -- juxtaposed with his paintings let to a real "Ah-ha" moment!

Section I. Introduction, pp. 1-5.
[None.]

Section II. Cezanne as Theorist and Artist, pp. 7-16.
THE FUNCTION OF LINE AND MODULATING.  In John Rewald's book, in a chapter entitled "Theories artistiques de Cezanne," the author
quotes from Balzac's novel, *Le Chef-d'oeuvre inconnu,* a passing in which, as he says, the hero, Frenhofer, expounds a theory of
drawing that is surprisingly close to the meaning of the quotations I have cited from Cezanne.  It is well established that Cezanne
felt a deep emotional identification with Frenhofer.  It is my opinion that Cezanne's contradictory opinions in some measure owe
their origin to this identification.
Frenhofer explains: "I have not dryly traced out the outer contours of my figure and made every little anatomical detail stand out,
because the human body doesn't end in lines....  [Ellipsis in original.]  Strictly speaking, drawing does not [page break] exist ...
[ellipsis in original] line is the means by which man gets a clear idea about the effect of light on objects; but there is no line
in nature, there everything is full: it is in modeling that one draws, that is to say that one detaches things from their surroundings,
the distribution of light alone is what gives the true semblance of things! ...  [Ellipsis in original.]  Perhaps one should not draw a
single feature; it might be better to approach a figure at the center, beginning first at the protuberances nearest the light, passing
on to the more shaded parts.  Doesn't the sun proceed in this way, that divine painter of the universe?"
Regardless of the many statements Cezanne has made that are similar to the theories expounded by Balzac's character, his actual procedure
in painting was quite different.  For example, instead of beginning at the highlights of forms, Cezanne began with the dark at the outer
contours.  He modulated gragually toward the light, painting with chromatic gradations.  We know this because, in a typical unfinished
painting, the protruding part of the volumes is often left entirely unpainted (Plate XXXVIII).  Almost all the water colors tell the same
story.
- pp. 12-13.  [Emphasis in original as italics.]

Section III. An Illustrated Glossary, pp. 17-24.
Part One
A Key Idea:
Thus line, plane, volume, color, texture, and so on, are the plastic means used to build and organize the total space in the picture plane.
Hence plastic qualities are not only three-dimensional, but two-dimensional as well.
- p. 18.
Context for the Key Idea Above:
THE PLASTIC MEANS or PLASTIC FORM are terms used often in the present study, and are given a connotation different from that made
familiar in art criticism and art history in general.  The traditional connotation implies sculptural roundness as achieved through
light-and-shade modeling and chiaroscuro.  In this book the term *sculptural effect* is used when roundness is implied.  On the contrary,
the term *plastic means* connotes three-dimensional space in general.  Diagram II is indended as a compendium of the plastic field for
Cezanne's picture shown in Plate VII.  All the diagrams in the Glossary deal with various aspects of the plastic means.  The sum of all
the diagrams for Plates I and X constitute the analysis of the plastic means that Cezanne has used in creating these paintings.  Thus
line, plane, volume, color, texture, and so on, are the plastic means used to build and organize the total space in the picture plane.
Hence plastic qualities are not only three-dimensional, but two-dimensional as well.
- p. 18.  [Emphasis in original as italics.]

Part Two
Note: this section contains many illustrations of basic compositions, e.g., Static Plane, Dynamic Plane, Overlapping Planes, etc., that
I might want to copy someday.

LIGHT AND DARK PATTERNS (CLOSED).  Diagram XVIII is a combination of light and dark patterns all of which remain *closed within their
separate compartments.*  Cezanne's still lifes may often be described as closed or *compartmental* in their color shapes; but more often,
and particularly in his landscapes, his color and light-dark patterns tend to be *open.*
OPEN-COLOR PATTERN.  Diagram XIX is an illustration of open patterns of light and dark.  In painting, the system is called open color.
When the patterns of light and dark (or color) are arbitrary and not confined to definitel forms, it is necessary to superimpose a line
drawing in order to establish volume and space.  Cezanne's painting abounds in examples of free and open color with superimposed line,
but his followers, notably Dufy, have made a definite method or system out of the idea.
- p. 24.  [Emphasis in original as italics.]

Section IV. How Cezanne Organized a Picture, pp. 25-33.

- p. 25

Section V. Cezanne's Materials and Method, p. 35.
[None.]

