
Quotes from Cezanne Portraits by John Elderfield with Mary Morton and Xavier Rey, 2017
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: I read only the Introduction to this book.

The English painter-critic Walter Sickert, writing in 1910, more carefully divided portraits into two kinds: "pictures painted
by artists as servants of their customers" and" pictures painted by artists who are masters of their customers."  But aspiring
French painters of the 1860s and 1870s, Cezanne included, had long mastered a third kind: pictures not paintef for customers,
but rather of people the knew.
An additional reason why portraiture needed to be redefined came as the result of an invention.  The enormous popularity of
photographic portraits, especially of small, informal *cartes-de-visite,* did not compromise the viability of portrait painting --
a common claim -- but did offer what historian Carol Armstrong nicely calls a "boldly strange" alternative to the painted portrait
that caught the attention of many critics and artists, such as Cezanne; and worried others.  The example of photography, a young,
mechanical, reproductive medium opposed to but influencing the old, personalized, imaginative one, expanded the question of
depersonalised representation, attaching it to concerns about modern alienation and loss of identity in an age of mass production.
Cezanne, although attracted to photography and himself accused of depersonalisation, was traditional in his views of the world and
highly suspicious of modernisation, famously complaining about the introduction of electric street lighting in Marseille because it
spoiled the twilight.
- p. 12. [Emphasis as italics in original.]

[See the painting on p. 40 in the book I bought, Cezanne by Ulrike Becks-Malorny.]
Rilke admired this work even more than the self-portrait; and, in the letter that he wrote about it, he made a tiny drawing of the
wallpaper pattern in the background - "a cross with the centre left out," he called it.  This motif quietly [page break] implies a
gridded substructure, a multicoloured pattern -- half billowing tapestry, half jigsaw -- of bands, blocks and curved pieces of
varying sizes.  The consistency of the composition lies in part in that settled order; and in part in the density of the pictorial
surface, the method of its building revealed in the less finished lower-right corner.  Within this spendour Hortense sits, cool and
composed.  There is nothing quite like this in the previous history of portraiture.
- pp. 19-20.

The depiction of emotions and expressions had been a topic of great interest among French artists since the seventeenth century,
first gaining currency in Charles Le Brun's phost humously published *Conferences sur l'expression* of 1698, and in appreciation of
the expressive heads of Cezanne's admired Nicholas Poussin, which may have been in his mind as he set about painting his own.  Moreover,
the term *tete d'expression,* describing portraits depicting emotion and the subject of a national competition established in the late
eighteenth century, remained in currency.
Notwithstanding the suggestions, mentioned earlier, that new French painting privileged expression of the individuality of the artist
over that of the sitter, there is plenty of personality in Impressionist portraits -- by Degas, Money, Reoir, and even in Manet's work,
despite the often-repeated claim that he always objectified his sitters.  Likewise, Cezanne's portraits had nearly always invoked a
sense -- and, in the cast of the self-portraits, a vivid sense -- of the character of the person painted.  However, it is usually a
sense of a settled permanence of character of the person painted.  However, it is usually a sense of a settled permanence of character
rather than of someone caught in a particular mood; therefore, not a "fictional" portrait in Baudelaire's sense of the word.  Complaining
of such "painting of moods," Rilke had commended Cezanne for keeping emotion, meaning expressed emotion, out of his work.  I don't think
he would have liked Cezanne's portraits of Hortense made in 1885-6 (cats 11.1-11.4).
This set of four paintings, and the sets that followed it through the remainder of the 1880s, do reveal expressed emotion.  Moreover,
they reveal alterations in emotion from portrait to portrait across the first set, and from set to set in those that follow.  However,
unlike traditional *tetes d'expression,* designed to specify a single emotion -- anger, joy, pain, sorrow, fright -- these paintings
obstruct such single readings.  Especially so in the case of the first set: what Hortense is feeling is all but impossible to specify.
Was Cezanne projecting his own feelings into what appear to be depictions of hers?  It raises the unanswerable question: did Cezanne
ask Hortense to assume particular expressions when he posed his wife?  Whether he did so or not, he obviously controlled the portrait's
mode of address.  Yet, in doing so, he seemed also to be offering Hortense a means of presenting herself, for we feel no clear line
between the painter's [page break] control and the sitter's self-presentation.  Such a portrait -- one that affords the sitter,
with the cooperation of the painter, the means of presenting him- or herself -- speaks of a quality of intimacy between the two,
whether or not the presentation they collaborate to produce also expresses mutual affection.
- pp. 24-25. [Emphasis as italics in original.]

One of these ["controversial aspects of his procedures"] concerns the time it took him to paint his portraits, Vollard observing that
Cezanne required 115 sittings for his, only to remain dissatisfied with it and to abandon it unfinished.
[page break]
This remark passed quickly into the mythology of modern picture-making, validating the importance of canvases that had taken (or were
claimed to have taken) Pablo Picasso and Henri Matisse almost as long to paint....  Cezanne's principal lesson, it seems, was that a
worrying, revisionary process could have an intrinsic value.  As Picasso said in 1935, it was Cezanne's anxiety that mattered, not what
he did.  In 1945, the philosopher Maurice Merleau-Ponty felt it was Cezanne's doubt that mattered, opening his now-celebrated essay on
this subject with the gratuitous statement that Cezanne required 150 sittings to paint a portrait, and 100 for a still life.
Delacroix, whom Cezanne passionately admired, wrote that "easy won pleasure ceases to be pleasure, and easy works of art are like easy
pleasures; they make little impression on those who look at them and also on those who have made them."  However, even leaving aside as
examples of youghtful exuberance his small portraits of his Uncle Dominique, each one supposedly painted in a single afternoon, we find
not only canvases that Cezanne must have reworked and reworked, but also others that appear to have been made fairly quickly and with
which he seems to have been satisfied.  But the question remains: why did Cezanne, according to Gasquet, "sometimes remain still for
twenty minutes between two strokes of the brush?"
- pp. 28-29.

On the one hand, we have reports like Vollard's of very many sittings; and we have statements by the artist such as, "Two sittings a day
with the model are more than enough to wear me out.  And that is how it has been for several weeks."  On the other, we have Gasquet saying
that he sat for his portrait only five or six times, then adding this remarkable postscript:
   I had thought that he had given up the picture.  Later, I discovered that he had spent roughly sixty sessions on it ... that
   he had worked on it after I had left.... During numerous sittings, Cezanne would seem to make but a few brushstrokes, but he
   was constantly boring into his model with his eyes....  I emphasise that, since it has often been claimed that Cezanne was
   only able to paint directly from the model, and never worked in any other way.  He had a memory for colours and line like
   almost no one else.
- p. 30.

