
Quotes from Cezanne by Himself, edited by Richard Kendall, 1988, 1994.
----------------------------------------------------------------------
Note: I read only the Introduction to this book.

Picasso, who was probably more indebted to Cezanne than to any other single artist, once insisted that it was
Cezanne's anxiety that impressed him above all.  His contemporary Matisse, writing of a small Cezanne canvas he
owned, claimed that it had "sustained me spiritually in the critical moments of my career as an artist," but
went on to admire "the exceptional sobriety of its relationships."
- p. 8.

Paul Cezanne has been celebrated as the greatest of the Impressionist generation, as the artist who laid the
foundations of Cubism and as the father of abstract art and the modern movement.
- p. 8.

Cezanne is still considered by many to be a 'difficult' artist, whose sometimes awkward, often unfinished, and
occasionally distressing imagery has never endeared itself to the wide public that has conspicuously adopted
contemporary figures such as Claude Money, Pierre-Auguste Renoir and Vincent Van Gogh.  Cezanne's reputation as
an 'artist's artist', or as a painter whose very complexity attracts those of a theoretical disposition, is a
forbidding one.
- p. 8.

Finally, Cezanne asserts that art must aspire to be an 'equivalent' to nature, a series of marks, colours and tones
on a canvas or sheet of paper that is not a copy, but a "realization of one's sensations."
- p. 8.

The Early Years, 1839-1874
--------------------------
As the only son of a rising middle-class family, he enjoyed an untroubled childhood, a privileged education and,
ultimately, a financially secure maturity.
- p. 9.

Cezanne was born in Aix-en-Provence, twenty miles north of Marseille and the Mediterranean, and four hundred miles
away from Paris.  The majority of his life was spent in and around Aix....  The story has often been told of how as
a teenager in the 1850s (he was born in 1839) he roamed the countryside in the company of his friends Emile Zoa and
Baptistin Baille, swimming, shooting ineffectually at whatever moved, reciting verse and developing that kinship
with nature that was to dominate his adult life.
- p. 9.

Cezanne's vocation as a artist came slowly and met with little encouragement.  As his earliest surviving letters
show, he struggled with his studies at the College Bourbon in Aix, finally matriculating in 1858.  For a while he
joined the life-drawing classes at the Aix Drawing Academy, learning to master the orthodox figure conventions of
the day, but family pressures soon obliged him to enrol [sic] as a student of law [!!!] at the University.  Cezanne's
family, particularly his father, was to have an exaggerated influence on his career, and it was with the greatest
reluctance that the only son was allowed to consider becoming an artist.  The family fortune had been built on banking,
and Louis-Auguste Cezanne had decided that a legal training for his son would be the best guarantee of their continuing
prosperity.
- p. 9.

Cezanne's determination to follow his own path is dramatically evident in his earliest surviving pictures, the drawings
and paintings from the 1860s which caused such consternation in Paris.  An audience accustomed to the work of his
maturity can still be shocked by these scenes of nakedness, rape and murder, the awkward groupings of clothed and
unclothed figures, the lugubrious portraits and oleaginous still lifes.
- p. 9.

It can hardly surprise us that these early paintings were rejected by the official Salon, but each rejection both
distressed Cezanne and increased his belief in his own independent vision.
- p. 10.

By the early 1870s much of the pattern of Cezanne's life was already established.  He worked remoreslessly at his art,
attracting few admirers and fewer purchasers.  Depending still on his allowance from his father, he regularly spent time
in Aix and its vicinity, but increasingly found the family atmosphere unsympathetic.  Matters became worse when he met a
young model, Hortense Fiquet, and began to live secretly with her in Paris.  In 1872 Hortense gave birth to a son,
christened Paul after his father, and an elaborate system of deception was developed to keep news of the liason and its
offspring from the family at Aix.
- p. 10.

The Years of Impressionism, 1874-1886
-------------------------------------
Cezanne's abhorrence of mere technique, of a meretricious 'perfection' which is easily learned and as easily admired,
remains one of his defining characteristics.
- p. 10.

In the 1880s his periods of painting the landscape in and around Aix became more protracted, but never a year passed
without a long residence in the capital and visits to exhibitions and friends.  Stubborn as ever, he continued to
submit to the Paris Salon, noting his rejections at times with anger and at times with something approaching pride.
He regularly returned to the Louvre to draw, filling hundreds of sketchbook pages with studies from the paintings and
sculptures he revered.
- p. 11.

One or two critics, notably Duret and Riviere, had by now rallied to Cezanne's defence and other collectors, such as
the wealthy painter Gustave Caillebotte, were soon to acquire pictures.  But such encouragement remained exceptional
and, embittered by public scorn and as far as ever from earning a living from his painting, Cezanne was obliged to
rely on the charity of Zola and the meagre support of his family.
Cezanne's tenacious dedication to his painting was never more acutely tested than during these years, the very years
when the definitive repertoire of his subject-matter and the distinctive language of his art were to establish their
roots and begin to bear such extraordinary fruit.  The compulsion to render nature, or rather to render his sensations
of natural and living forms, whether landscape, portrait or still life, still provided the essential momentum for his
work....  According to Joachim Gasquet, who was admittedly given to rather fanciful recollections, Cezanne once claimed
to overhear conversations between the fruit he was painting, and approached each item in a group as he would a human
portrait.  It is certainly known that he took great pains over the arrangement of his still lifes, propping up objects
with hidden piles of coins and assembling an elaborate cast of bottles, jugs and more exotic objects like [page break]
skulls and plaster sculptures to provide the necessary visual drama for his tabletop stage.
- pp. 11-12.

[**Very important** info about how he inspired the cubists.]
Objects and furnishings seem to be chosen for the disparity of their relationships, for their ability to engage the
broadest possible range of visual and tactile sensibilities.  There is, in addition, evidence of Cezanne's famous
willingness to 'distort', to allow the top and bottom of a jar or two sides of a plate to follow different systems of
perspective, as if the artist's need for the fullest possible truth has led h im to integrate information carried over
from previous perceptions of the subject.
- p. 12.
- p. 12.
- p. 12.
- p. 11.

