
Notes and quotes from Triggered: How the Left Thrives on Hate and Wants to Silence Us by Donald Trump Jr., 2019.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Chapter 1 - Trigger Warning - pp. 1-6
Your Trigger Warning (Section title)
Do not continue reading this book if you don't like conservative ideas or if the thought of reading bad words scares you.
Do not continue reading if you don't have a sense of humor or are American but somehow, magically, Donald Trump is not your
president.  Also, if you find any of the following even remotely offensive: patriotism, masculinity, hunting, MAGA hates,
the American flag, guns, sex, religion, Roseanne Barr, criticism of stupid ideas, capitalism, skyscrapers, or the use of the
word "Christmas" during the Christmas season, then you should *definitely* stop reading.
 - p. 4.

Chapter 2 - Counterpunch - pp. 7-22
(By the way, though I use the terms "lefty, leftist, and left" interchangeably with "Democrat" in these pages, not all
Democrats are leftists.  Many are good people, some even voted for my father.  Unfortunately, the party has lost its way
and is now run by the leftists and the socialists.)
 - p. 19.

Chapter 3 - Cracks in the Foundation - pp. 23-46
My friends in the Czech Republic [where he spent a lot of time with his grandparents while growing up] would tell me how
hard it was to make the transition from a command economy, where the state makes the rules and requires the bare minimum of
its citizens. to to a market economy, where citizens get only what they work for and government handouts are slimmer.  Much
like people who depend on welfare in the United States, many had gotten used to not working and getting everything for free.
Teaching them to start businesses and earn money for themselves was more difficult than anyone expected - although for those
with the ability and the willingness to work, the possibilities were endless.
 - p. 34.

Chapter 4 - Class Warfare - pp. 47-66
[Don Jr. has just learned a few things from his father.]
That day I learned a few lessons that have stuck with me.  Number one: You [page break] shouldn't expect to get anything in
life that you didn't work for.  Number two: If you don't ask for it, don't expect it.  And number three: When someone goes
around offering things for free, don't believe them.  In most cases, that person is a liar or an idiot.
Or a leftist, which means they're both.
 - pp. 52-53.

(Please don't be swayed by the liberal media.  Read @realDonaldTrump and @DonaldJTrumpJr's tweets.  They're the unfiltered truth.)
 - p. 65.

Chapter 5 - Gap Year - pp. 67-86
In less than three years, my father has almost completely reconfigured the Republican Party, a political entity that, frankly,
was headed toward extinction.  In less than one term, he's torn down an establishment structure that took fifty years to build.
Today, most establishment Republicans have little or no significance in the political world, certainly not the ones who oppose
Donald Trump....  Today, Bob Corker and Jeff Flake couldn't get elected dog catcher.  Paul Ryan got so embarrassed by how out-
of-touch he'd become that he had to retire.  Out of all the establishment Republicans who didn't understand my father, Paul Ryan
was by far the most confused.  Good riddance.
 - p. 80.

Chapter 6 - Not Exactly the Statue of Liberty - pp. 87-108

Chapter 7 - Not Your Grandfather's Democrat Party - pp. 109-122
In response, my new friend -- let's call him "Rusty" -- went on to tell me that he and his buddies were all from the same union
local.  They'd traveled more than a hundred miles to come hear my dad's speech.  Rusty in particular had come from a long line
of union people, mostly carpenters and electricians from Wisconsin, who'd all followed the same path in life.
 - p. 111.

For Rusty's grandfather, that Democrat was probably Franklin D. Roosevelt, the man who practically invented the labor union and
brought the whole American working class out of the Great Depression.  At least it can be argued that his vote made some sense
at the [page break] time.  Then for his father, it would have been John F. Kennedy (JFK would be considered alt-right today) or
LBJ.  In keeping with family tradition, Rusty joined the local and cast his first vote for Barack H. Obama, a man who took more
money from the paychecks of blue-collar workers than any president since the Great Depression.  Clearly, Rusty's presidential
votes to that time were votes against his own self-interest.  It wasn't really his fault, though.
 - pp. 111-112.

Blue-Collar Billionaire - section title
In the aftermath of the election, the so-called experts and geniuses on TV were shocked to find that my father had gotten
unheard-of levels of support from voters who belonged to labor unions.
 - p. 115.

What all those morons with Ivy League jornalism degrees failed to see was right there in plain sight.  As I've often said, if
you want to wear yourself out, follow Donald J. Trump around a job site someday.  My father doesn't just visit a construction
project, he stays the whole day and comes back the next day.  By the time he's through, he knows most of the workers' names,
every problem they've encountered, and just about exactly how much he's spent.
 - p. 116.

When my father stepped out onto the stage for the first time, he was talking to people he had been working with his entire
life.
No one else in the race could say that.
 - p. 118.

Chapter 8 - Back to School - pp. 123-144
(I've always found it funny that the same people who'll tell you there are something like fifteen genders are the same people
who tell you that politics boils down to either "Nazi" or "not Nazi.")
 - p. 128.

And by the way, I would never say anything derogatory about people in the LGBTQ community or people of color, let alone try to
do them harm.
But in today's climate, words have completely lost their meanings.  When conservatives speak, it's called "violence."  When
liberals react to that speech by beating people up and throwing rocks through windows, it's called "self-defense."
 - p. 132.

Although it goes back many years, the problem seems to have ramped up around 2010 or so, when a generation of kids who'd
been raised with phones in their hands and participation trophies on their shelves first entered college.  Their whole lives,
those kids had been taught by their helicopter parents that feelings are the only things that matter and that they shouldn't
have to be exposed to anything they don't like.  Instead of playing outside and scraping their knees, those kids stayed on
social media and got a 24/7 mainline of garbage and outrage beamed right in to their brains.
It's no wonder they came out soft and unable to function.
 - p. 132.

They were living through some of the most volatile emotional years of their lives, and they had a massive audience at their
fingertips.  All they had to do was tweet, and the whole world would move for them.  That's the kind of power you shouldn't
have at any age.
 - p. 133.

According to an economist named Nassim Nicholas Taleb, there are three ways an object can be in the world: frag-[page break]
ile; not fragile; or a third category. *antifragile.*  When something is fragile, it breaks under stress and you can't use it
anymore.  A glass vase is fragile; so are light bulbs....  Other things, such as steel and rocks, don't break no matter how
much pressure you apply to them.  On college campuses today, students are demanding to be treated as if they're fragile.  They
say if they're exposed to too many bad ideas, they'll break and cease to function.  But human beings are not fragile, they are
antifragile.
Things in this third category actually become *stronger* the more pressure you apply to them.  They can't survive without
stress and tension.  This is the way human beings are, especially as children.  The more stress we endure -- to a point, of
course -- the stronger we become.  And if we live a life that is completely free of stress -- say, streteched out in bed for
a year watching television -- our muscles break down and we become useless.
 - pp. 138-139.

Chapter 9 - Election Night - pp.145-158
I've always looked up to my father and admired him more than anyone, but we seemed to have much different styles and approaches
to life.  Where he was brash and in-your-face, I was a little more reserved.  Where he was at home amid the skyscrapers and
kinetic energy of Manhattan, I was happy out in the woods or behind the wheel of my truck.  But the campaign for president, and
all the craziness that went along with it, changed all that.
 - p. 149.

I rarely get emotional, if ever.  I guess you'd call me hyper-rational, stoic.  Yet, as we drove past the rows of white grave
markers [in Arlington National Cemetary], in the gravity of the moment, I had a deep sense of the importance of the presidency
and a love of our country.
 - p. 155.

Chapter 10 - A Deadly Form of Hate - pp. 159-172
Maybe you disagree with my dad and the Americans who support him.  If you do, guess what?  You're allowed to....  By definition,
however, a disagreement has two sides.  If one side engages in a full-out war of misinformation, hurtful invectives, and physical
violence toward the other, it's not a disagreement.
It's called hate.
 - p. 166.

The War Against Christians in the United States - section title
Nowhere is this upside-down thinking by the left more evident that in the way Christians are treated in our country today.
 - p. 166.

Chapter 11 - Miss Gendered - pp. 173-183
Now, I am a "live and let live kind" of guy and truly don't care what you identify as.  As far as I'm concerned, you can
identify yourself any way you want.  Whatever makes you happy.  Just don't send me to jail if I get it wrong.
I do have a problem, however, when some individuals take advantage of the situation and try to game the system.  So if you're
a male athlete in college and you're getting your ass handed to you by all the other big, strong males in your division, you
might have a way out!  All you have to do is declare that you're a woman, and suddenly your competition gets smaller and less
muscular.  It's like magic!
 - p. 176.

Chapter 12 - The Enemy of the People? - pp. 184-204
The press reported that my dad had described neo-Nazis as "very fine people."  Nothing could have been further from the truth,
yet those words were reported an infinite number of times in the media....  Some people wanted the statue taken down; some
wanted it to stay and have the park in which it stood renamed after the Confederate general.  And guess what?  There were fine
people on both sides of that protest.
 - p. 191.

Chapter 13 - Shadow Banned: How the Liberals' Grip on Social Media Can Ruin Your Life - pp. 205-224
Now, I'm not saying Twitter is inherently a bad thing.  Without Twitter, Instagram, and Facebook, we might very well have
ended up with Hillary Clinton as president of the United States.
 - p. 213.

Chapter 14 - The Late-Night King of Comedy With Jussie Smollett and the Fauxtrage Orchstra - pp. 225-242
In an ideal world, as laid out by Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., people would be judged based on the content of their character,
not the color of their skin....  Now people who claim to share Dr. King's vision of the world are asking us to go backward,
to pay more attention to the color of everyone's skin and less attention to the content of their character.  They're claiming
that knowledge can come only from being born a certain color or with a particular sexual orientation and that no one can
understand anyone else just by sitting down and talking to them.
 - p. 241.

Chapter 15 - Joe China - pp. 243-252
Chapter 16 - The Opposition - pp. 253-266

Chapter 17 - Trump 2020 - pp. 267-284
Have you ever seen a story -- just *one* story -- that broke in favor of Trump instead of the other way around?  Of course not.
 - p. 172.

