
Notes and quotes from Bloomberg by Bloomberg, Revised and Updated, by Michael R. Bloomberg, 2019.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Preface
And that, truthfully, is the real story behind nearly every success: Teams make it all possible.  Leaders get
the credit, but the best ones are quick to share it.  I've tried to do that throughout my career.
 - p. ix.

For all that we've accomplished, I still believe that tomorrow will be better than today, and the best is yet
to come.
 - p. ix.

Chapter 1: The Last Supper - The Thrill of Getting Fired: Tarrytown 1981
[No quotes.]

Chapter 2: Capitalism, Here I Come - School, Work, and Hard Knocks
I was one of the youngest Eagle Scouts in that organization's history.  Boy Scout summer camp was the highlight
of the year.  I paid for my lodging there by selling our troop's Christmas wreaths door-to-door (my first
selling experience).
 - p. 11.

On Saturday mornings in the winter, I went to the Boston Museum of Science for lectures that introduced the
natural and physical world in a way my school could not.  Each week, for two hours, I sat spellbound as an
instructor brought snakes, porcupines, and owls for us to hold; demostrated the basic laws of physics with
hands-on experiments; and quizzed us on every museum exhibit.
 - p. 11.

I hadn't the interest or intellect to be a real engineer, physicist, or mathematician.  What I really liked
doing -- and what I was good at -- was dealing with people.
 - p. 12.

Trusting to great luck is a strategy not likely to work for most people.  As a practical matter, constantly
enhance your skills, put in as many hours as possible, and make tactical plans for the next few steps.
Then, based on what actually occurs, look one more move ahead and adjust the plan.  Take lots of chances,
and make lots of individual, spur-of-the-moment decisions.
 - p. 31.

Chapter 3: I Love Mondays - Entrepreneurship: Vocation and Avocation
I used to write all the checks myself.  I signed every contract.  I paid every bill.  I did the hiring and
firing.  I bought the coffee, sodas, cookies, and chips we nibbled on.  I emptied the wastebaskets and dusted
the window sills.  I wrote and handed out the paychecks personally to each and every one of our employees
working in New York City, thus giving me the chance to follow up on project and people development, to offer
encouragement, or to "bust a few chops" if need be.  By the 1990s, there was a specialist for each of these
functions.
 - p. 60.

Moving from "hands-on" to "hands-off" management was a gradual, and not all that pleasant, process for me.
I like doing [page break] things myself, getting my hands dirty.  If we were to grow and not be dependent
on yours truly, turn it over I must....  Anyone who tries to micromanage a large organization will fail in
the end.
 - pp. 60-61.

Physical plant, compensation politics, personnel policies, promotion, training, and so on -- all of these at
Bloomberg are designed with our culture in mind.  The prospect of losing our culture -- open, nimble,
innovative, driving, caring, cooperative, unafraid of risk -- is a bigger threat to our company than any
outside competitor.
 - p. 64.

[It bears repeating, and highlighting: "open, nimble, innovative, driving, caring, cooperative, unafraid of risk."]
The prospect of losing our culture -- open, nimble, innovative, driving, caring, cooperative, unafraid of
risk -- is a bigger threat to our company than any outside competitor.
 - p. 64.

Chapter 4: We Can Do That - Elementary Journalism, Not Rocket Science
In short, Bloomberg disrupted the relationship between the sell side and buy side by empowering the buy side
with information that previously had been almost entirely in the hands of the sell side.  The sell side wasn't
too happy with us, to put it mildly, because we provided accurate historical and real-time data to their
customers, who could now refuse to pay inflated prices....  In other words, by making an opaque market
transparent, we made pricing more accurate and trading more efficient, driving spreads [commissions] down --
and making the cost of a financial transaction less expensive.
 - p. 76.

Chapter 5: "No" Is No Answer - Establishment Ignorance and Arrogance
Much of that content sits behind the media world's most expensive paywall.  A subscription to Bloomberg costs
about $22,000 a year.  That works out to $88 per work day.  When customers complain that it's expensive, we tell
them: If you can't make $88 a day using Bloomberg, you have a bigger problem than our bill.
 - p. 108.

Some of the biggest stories are published on Bloomberg.com, which also features an opinion section offering
commentary grounded in data -- from the left, right, and middle.
While Bloomberg publishes and broadcasts in countries around the world, more and more people are using their
phones to watch video.  So we created the first global video news network streaming live and designed for
mobile phones, called TicToc.
 - p. 108.

As the media landscape has fragmented, so has society.  The less we have in common as media consumers, the
harder it is to speak a common language around the biggest issues facing society.
 - p. 110.

And the harder it is to find and trust "real" news -- news reported according to the highest standards of
professional journalism, with facts backed by data and reporting free of partisan or ideological bias -- the
more valuable it will become, and the better Bloomberg will do.
 - p. 110.

This breakdown in an accepted basis of fact has coincided with the rise in partisan media and the segregation,
by political beliefs, of the American public.  Pundits talk past one another, and people gravitate to news outlets
that will confirm their preexisting beliefs -- and the more bombastic the pundits, the more popular they are, and
the more money their employers make.  For nearly all of history, from Socrates to Cronkite, news was written,
organized, and desseminated by the educated and wealthy.  People didn't always like the news, but they mostly
believed what they were hearing and reading.  They trusted news organizations to deliver facts and truths.  That
world is gone.
 - p. 110.

What's required for success in these businesses?  Why do some companies like Bloomberg, charging about $2,000 per
month for electronically delivered information, keep growing when others can't keep customers even when charging
only pennies -- or nothing at all?  Simple: *supply and demand.*  If you're not providing something unique, you
have no ability to impose charges....  No uniqueness: *too much supply.*  Hence the success of original shows on
on-demand services.
 - p. 111.

Chapter 6: Money Talks - Textbook Multimedia
As a true capitalist, I've always believed in the markets' (rather than central planners') ability to make efficient
selections.  In many [page break] of our new ventures, we don't appoint a manager at the beginning.  We simply throw
everyone interested into the deep end of the pool, as it were, and stand back.  It becomes obvious very quickly who
the best "swimmers" are.  We just watch who people go to for help and advice.  And later, when we formalize a
mangement appointment, no one's ever surprised.
The leverage we gain from employing creative people and letting them do their own thing is incredible.  Our open
office design encourages innovation, and our flat management structure guarantees a well-functioning meritocracy.
 - pp. 120-121.

At Bloomberg, all we ask is that they come up with as many new ideas as they can think of (no matter how "crazy"),
and do their best on the projects we assign.  If a concept is flawed, the blame and pain rest with me.  The credit
for whatever's right goes to them.
 - p. 123.

Chapter 7: Man vs. Machine - Technology: Politics and Promises
As I found out at Salomon and again with the Bloomberg Terminal, you promise users everything; then you build what
you can and what you think they need.  It's the only successful strategy for a systems developer.  People always
say, "I can't do my job without that last little bit."  But that last little bit is not only so hard to build, it's
invariably so complex to use that no one ever does.  Making all settle for a touch less is the job.  Management has
to reconcile the conflicts between stated needs and what can be delivered, and when that's not possible, to make the
decision for everyone, a priori.  Companies in the end need direction, not discussion.
Back then, and now, I've always insisted on building a simple "do a few things" version of software up front.  Most
people are terrible at understanding and enunciating what they actually do day in and day out, and on what basis
they make decisions....  But if you give them something they can see and touch, then both they and you can get
experience as to a program's utility and applicability, or at least have a common basis for enhancements.
 - p. 141.

Chapter 8: Management 101 - The Bloomberg Way
[Start of chapter.]
When you start a company, every obstacle is a challenge.  Everyone's out to get you: That's just the way it is, and
you work around it.  What's available to the big guys isn't available to you, like bank credit.  That's an advantage;
you develop a low-cost product.  What if you can't find anyone to share your vision?  Great.  When your ship comes in,
you won't have any competition.  Are the bureaucrats driving you crazy?  Fantastic.  You'll neurtralize them by playing
them against one another.  Is your company so small you have to do everything yourself?  Wait until you're so big you
can't.  That's worse.  I know.
 - p. 153.

We have no reserved parking spaces for senior executives.  If you want to leave your car right by the door, just come
in earlier.  Creating class distinctions isn't constructive.  That's why I don't believe in executive dining rooms
either.  The issue isn't fairness.  If we constantly remind those people at the bottom that they are not at the top,
do you really expect them to be "gung ho" about the company?  Remember, remove the bottom 50 percent and half of
everyone remaining joins that group instantly.
 - p. 159.

Chapter 11: Wealth, Wisdom, and Work - Philanthropy and Public Service
When President Trump announced his intention to withdraw from the Paris Climate Agreement in 2017, I worked with
California governor Jerry Brown to organize a coalition of states, cities, and businesses that remain committed to
driving down emissions and upholding our end of the bargain....  The fact is, bottom-up partnerships that are aligned
to market trends -- like the declining price of renewable energy -- have driven far more progress on climate change
than top-down mandates.  That's why I believe the United States will meet its commitment under the Paris agreement,
no matter what obstacles Washington throws in the way.
 - p. 226.

Since I've always believed in leading by example, I pitch in too: I've painted schools and planted trees and donated
blood, something I've been doing for ages.  The best way to encourage employees to donate their time and energy is to
do it yourself.  Inspiration works better than dictation.
 - p. 234.

