
Notes and quotes from With All Due Respect, Defending America With Grit and Grace, by Nikki R. Haley, 2019.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Prologue
I'm more convinced than ever that American leadership is necessary for a more peaceful and just world.  They
don't like to admit it, but other countries feel the same way.  Many countries [page break] never miss the
opportunity to publicly run down the United States at the UN.  But I can't tell you how many times representatives
of these same countries used very different words in private.  Time and again they told me that they welcomed --
even yearned for -- U.S. leadership.  They envy our ability to live and speak freely.  They admire our principles.
And they depend on us to lead the world in accordance with our values.
 - pp. 7-8.

I looked at the United Nations the way many Americans do, if they look at all.  And what I saw was a lot of hypocrisy
and dysfunction being tolerated as business as usual.  The United States is by far the largest contributor to the
United Nations.  But what have we been getting for our investment?
 - p. 8.

The UN is a tough place to work.  It is not for the soft of heart.  You have to believe in what you're fighting for
and never let your [page break] guard down.
 - pp. 8-9.

I am the daughter of Indian immigrants, born in a small town in rural South Carolina.  I was a brown girl in a
black-and-white world.  My sister and I -- just four and eight years old -- were disqualified from a children's
pageant because we weren't white or black.  We were somewhere in between.  The pageant organizers thought in
categories, and they didn't have a category for us.
 - p. 11.

And when I ran for governor, the pain was bipartisan.  An African American Democrat denounced me as not a "real
minority" but "a conservative with a tan."  And a white Republican called me a "raghead."
This kind of pain stays with you, and it can overwhelm you if you let it.  Many different kinds of Americans endure
this pain.  I've tried to use my own, not for blame, but for knowledge.
 - p. 11.

Chapter 1 - The Murders in Charleston
When our press conference [about the shooting at Mother Emanuel Church] was finished, I was angry and disappointed
with myself.  I had done what I was afraid I would do.  I had lost control of my emotions.  As a woman, this is
something that I have always been particularly sensitive to.  And at this time of all times, when the people of my
state needed strength and reassurance, I felt like I had showed them weakness.
 - p. 19.

These were painful experiences for my parents [e.g., when "no one would rent them a house when they first came to
Bamberg"].  I learned important lessons from them.  The pain of being an outsider -- of being judged unfairly --
never really leaves you.  But it gives you an appreciation for the different experiences of different groups, even
in a place as open and accepting as America.  More important, it allows you to see and to appreciate how much has
changed.
 - p. 25.

Chapter 2 - The Flag Comes Down
I went to every one of the funerals [for the victims murdered at Mother Emanual Church].  Most were held at Mother
Emanual Church.  Every funeral included an open casket.  I watched family members fall over their loved ones' bodies
in complete despair.  I heard them cry out, asking God why.  Every family asked me to speak.  Sometimes I would hold
it together.  Sometimes I would break down.  I tried to honor the dead and comfort the living.  But in the end, I
couldn't do much to diminish the pain.  It destroyed me to watch the people I was supposed to be taking care of suffer
so much.
 - p. 30.

My experience with Jesse Jackson was very different [from her experience with Al Sharpton]....
Our backgrounds were different.  But we didn't get into a contest over who had suffered the most....
I consider Jesse Jackson a friend to this day because he took time to know me as a person.  He didn't come into South
Carolina and take shots at me just because I was a Republican.  He didn't come into my state to stir up trouble.  He
came in to understand.
 - p. 43.

My gift has always been to focus on what's in front of me, work until I get it right, and never take my eye off the ball.
But that gift was failing me after the Mother Emanuel shootings.  I could keep it together long enough for a press
conference or a meeting, but when I returned to my office I would cry constantly.
 - p. 45.

Chapter 3 - The Country Turns to Trump
When we [Mitch McConnell, Paul Ryan, and Nikki] connected on the phone, they told me to deliver the Republican response
to Barack Obama's last State of the Union address in January.
 - p. 56.

I delivered the speech from the governor's mansion in Columbia.  I was nervous.  It was the first time I had deliberately
stepped into the national spotlight.
 - p. 57.

I only had time to touch on a few issues in the speech.  I decided to devote a portion of it to what was being distorted
by both sides: immigration and the controversy over how America was dealing with refugees, particularly people fleeing the
bloody Assad regime in Syria.
 - p. 58.

My parents came legally.  So it is no surprise that they are offended by those who try to come here illegally.  America is
a generous and open country; my family experienced that firsthand.  But it makes no sense to allow people to break our
laws and in return get education, health care, and housing, all at the expense of Americans who are here legally.
 - p. 58.

So I went directly to the source at the time: then FBI director James Comey.  I asked him point-blank if I should be
concerned about Syrian refugees coming to live in South Carolina.  His response was telling.
"We don't have any information on the Syrian refugees," Director Comey told me.  "We have no background information on
them.  We don't know if they pose a threat or not."
That was all I needed to hear.
 - p. 61.

By the time I delivered my State of the Union response, the debate over Syrian refugees had become toxic.  There were
voices on both sides accusing the other of bad faith.  For me, it was always about the best interests of the American
people.
 - p. 61.

It was the growing polarization in our immigration debate and in our politics in general that inspired the line that the
media instantly sensationalized from my speech.
"During anxious times, it can be tempting to follow the siren call of the angriest voices," I said.  "We must resist that
temptation."
 - p. 62.

My speech [responding to Obama's final State of the Union Address in 2016] was an appeal, not to pretend we didn't have
differences, but to avoid demonizing those we disagree with.  Appealing to the worst in our fellow Americans was fueling
an endless cycle of political point scoring.  It might make some people feel good, but it accomplished nothing constructive.
And it was dangerous.
[Page break.]
As if to prove my point, sensationalist pundit Ann Coulter tweeted after my speech, "Trump should deport Nikki Haley."
 - pp. 63-64.

"I'm an accountant.  I'm telling you there's no audit that precludes you from showing your tax return,"  I told the
cheering crowd.  "Donald Trump, show us your tax return!"
Early the next morninig, on Super Tuesday, I got into my car after an event and received a tweet forwarded from my
press office.
[Tweet:] @realDonaldTrump: The people of South Carolina are embarrassed by Nikki Haley!
Trump had been kicked, and he was hollering.  But what he didn't know then was, when I get kicked, I holler, too.  When
I saw the tweet, the right response just came to me.  I tweeted:
[Tweet:] #nikkihaley: @realDonaldTrump, Bless your heart.
It was southern-woman code.  Three polite words that let the receiver know you mean something not so polite.  One
Charleston newspaper called it "the tweet heard 'round the South."  Whatever [page break] it was, it changed my
relationship with Donald Trump.  After that, there was a kind of strange respect between us.  He knew I was tough and I
was going to say what I think.  I understood he was the same.
 - pp. 66-67.

Donald Trump won because he reached a culture in America that has felt ignored and voiceless.
 - p. 70.

I discovered that when you go places that are uncomfortable for you, you grow stronger.  This has been the story of my
life, over and over.  I've always been underestimated.  I get into a situation, and everyone says I'm not prepared enough
and I can't do it.  And I've always responded by diving in, working harder than everyone else, and proving them wrong.  I
don't let what other people think bother me.  I just work.
 - p. 71.

Chapter 4 - A New Day at the UN
I told the president-elect that I would need some adjustments to the offer.  He asked me what they were.
"Well, I've been a governor and I don't want to work for anyone else.  I would have to work directly with you.  So I would
want this to be a cabinet position," I said.
He said, "Sounds reasonable.  Done.  What else?"
"I'm a policy girl, and I would want to be in the room when decisions are made," I said.  "So I would want a seat on the
National Security Council."
He quickly replied, "Done.  What else?"
That's when I felt a pit in my stomach.  I didn't expect him to respond so comfortably and willingly to what were tough asks.
"Well, sir," I said.  "I'm not going to be a wallflower or talking head.  I have to be able to say what I think."
"That's why I want you to do this!" the president-elect answered.
I had no more excuses.  The president-elect was completely gracious, respectful, and determined to get his cabinet in place.
 - p. 78.

Chapter 5 - Taking Names
It was clear that life in New York was going to be very different....
 - p. 88.

It was only later that we found out the school had offered two days of grief counseling after President Trump was elected.  We
*definitely* were not in South Carolina anymore.
 - p. 88.  [Emphasis in original as italics.]

I wanted to hit the ground running with a team of people I knew and trusted.  I finally told the director of the Trump transition
team that enough was enough.
"I'm not taking y'all's people as rewards for the campaign," I told him.  "I have a job to do, and I need my people to do it."
I hated to have to be so direct so early in my new job, but this was a deal-breaker for me.  When the transition team continued to
slow-walk my people through the hiring process, I made a decision to do something that would serve me well throughout my time in
the Trump administration: I called the president.
 - p. 89.

Chapter 6 - Red Lines and Dictators
Hard as it may be to believe, I have a twenty-four-hour rule.  I learned this about myself during my time in the South Carolina
legislature.  Whenever I can, I check my immediate instinct to respond.  In the most stressful situations, it's best to wait twenty-
four hours before you return fire, if you can.  In the heat of the moment, things run through your head.  Emotions run wild, and your
instincts are soft.  Waiting twenty-four hours allows you to pick and choose your battles.
 - p. 108.

Chapter 7 - Maximum Pressure
"What do you think of this?" the president asked me.  "What do you think of me calling Kim Jong Un 'Little Rocket Man' in the General
Assembly?"
"Remember when I said this was going to be like church?" I answered.  "This is a very serious crowd.  That's not something they would
be used to hearing."  [Page break]
The president protested.
"I tweeted it this morning and it's killing on Twitter," he said.
He was the president.  If he wanted to do it, he was going to do it.
"It's okay if you want to do it, just know that I don't know what kind of reaction you're going to get," I said.
 - pp. 128-129.

Chapter 8 - Changing the Culture
Kelly and Tillerson confided in me that when they resisted the president, they weren't being insubordinate, they were trying to save
the country.  It was *their* decisions, not the president's, that were in the best interests of America, they said.  The president
didn't know what he was doing.
"I don't even think he realizes what the legislative branch is and that members of Congress are elected by the people," Kelly said.
 - p. 150. [Emphasis in original as italics.]

Chapter 9 - Beyond the Echo Chamber
As I watched the president's remarks [concerning the protests in Charlottesville in August, 2017], I was deeply disturbed. I was
certain he didn't understand how damaging his remarks were.  But I had been through this.  A leader's words matter in these situations.
And the president's words had been hurtful and dangerous.
 - p. 169.

America is living through a time when our politics, media, and popular culture are exaggerating our differences, and weaponizing them.
People talk about diversity more than ever, but too many of us are becoming intolerant in the name of tolerance.  Instead of trying to
understand those who disagree with us, we tend to write them off as not even fit to have a conversation with.  Instead of focusing on
the things that bring us together, too many Americans obsess about the things that separate us.
We have to resist the forces that are pulling us apart, whether they are coming from the left or the right.  Because it is our values
-- our belief that life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness come to us from God, not government -- that ties us together as
Americans.  It is countries where those values are *absent* that tribalism and hatred flourish.  We can never fail to make this case.
 - p. 171. [Emphasis in original as italics.]

Chapter 10 - I Don't Get Confused
When a challenge presents itself, instead of stepping backward, I jump.  When I feel the fear in my gut, I push through it.  And when
you do what you fear most and you succeed, something amazing happens.  Your confidence, your strength and your abilities grow beyond
what you ever thought possible.  You can justifiably feel proud of yourself.  Most important, you are able to tell those coming up
behind you that they can jump, too.
 - p. 175.

One Tuesday afternoon, at a press conference in Florida following the president's talks with Japanese prime minister Shinzo Abe, White
House economic advisor Larry Kudlow threw me under the bus.
Asked by a reporter if there was confusion in the White House over Russian sanctions, Larry gave the White House line that "additional
sanctions are under consideration but have not been determined."  As for me, I "got out ahead of the curve," Larry said.
"There might hae been some momentary confusion about that," he said.
I was done.
 - p. 180.

I tried calling Larry, but I was, again, getting the silent treatment.  At that point, I knew I had to respond.  Some members of my staff
didn't want me to make an issue of it.  But if there is one thing I know, it's that if you don't stand up when your name and your integrity
are on the line, no one else will.
 - p. 181.

I called Fox News's Dana Perino....
I told Dana I wanted to go on record with a response to what Larry had said.  She said okay, shoot.
I told her my comment was simple: "With all due respect, I don't get confused."
 - p. 181.

Dana used the quote for her "One More Thing" segment at the end of the show.  Within fifteen minutes of it airing, Larry called me.
"Nikki, I'm calling you with my tail between my legs," he said.  "I'm so sorry.  You know how much I love you."
 - p. 181.

Chapter 12 - The Fight for a Hemisphere of Freedom
History had already proven this, time and again.  The first sign of conflict is a country that doesn't respect the rights of its people.
It never fails.  When a government violates human rights, people protest.  And when voices get loud, the government faces a choice:
either listen to the voices and make changes, or suppress the voices.  [Page break]  Governments that don't respect human rights always
choose to suppress dissent.  And that's how conflict begins.
 - pp. 211-212.

We hadn't changed the outcome of a symbolic vote in the United Nations.  But we had exposed the hypocrisy and corruption at the heart of
the vote, and that was something worthwhile.
"While today's votes were not admirable, they were highly illuminating," I concluded.  "And that light contributes to the cause of truth,
which is the essential basis of freedom and human rights."
 - p. 223.

Many of our friends urged us to stay on the Human Rights Council for the sake of the institution.  The United States, they said,
provided the last shred of credibility the council had.  But in the end, that is precisely why I felt we had to withdraw.
The right to speak freely and to associate and worship freely, the right to determine your own future and to be treated equally
under the law -- these are sacred rights.  They are ours by virtue of our humanity, not by virtue of the country or tribe we were
born into.  Americans take these rights seriously, too seriously to allow them to be cheapened, especially by an institution that
calls itself the Human Rights Council.
We left the HRC, not because we don't care about human rights for all, but because we do.  We were criticized for the move, but I've
never been more sure about anything in my life.
 - p. 225.

Chapter 13 - Exiting on My Terms
You can't win with the Washington press corps.  The article [in the Washington Post entitled "A Rising Star"] noted ominously that
the "timing of Haley's exit, less than a month before the 2018 midterms, struck many in the president's circle as either savvy or
suspect."
Either "savvy or suspect?"  Those were my choices?  When did we become a country in which the media automatically disregards public
officials' explanations for their actions?  It reminded me of being called the "A" word -- "ambitious."  I was being accused of being
way more calculating than I am.  The truth was, I had been in public service for fourteen years at that point, from the South Carolina
legislature to the governorship to the United Nations.  I felt it was time for me to take a breath.
 - p. 231.

This is the foundational dilemma of the United Nations.  It is set up to treat all countries the same.  But all countries are not the
same.  Some respect freedom and human rights, and some don't.  And when you try to pretend there's no difference between these kinds
of governments, that's always a win for governments that don't respect human dignity.  The Holocaust survivor and Nobel laureate Elie
Wiesel put it this way: "Neutrality helps the oppressor, never the victim."  He was right.
 - p. 234.

Our values are our most potent foreign-policy tool.  They give us leverage at the United Nations and throughout the world.  And as
long as we are in the UN, we must use them.  It's a mistake for the United States to believe we have to go along with the mob in
order to be effective.  The opposite is true: We have to be the ones to stand up to the mob.  When we see rape being used as a weapon
of war, dictators getting rich by robbing the people of their resources, [page break] or oppressive regimes trying to blame others for
the suffering they inflict -- when we see these things we have to call them out.  When we do, we might not win the vote at the UN, but
we can shame these governments.  Because when the United States calls out a country or an injustice, the world takes notice.
 - pp. 234-235.

Most important, our partnership [with India] is based on shared principles.  Our two countries share a belief in democracy, hard work,
family, and achievement.  Indian Americans have been very successful in [page break] the United States.  We are the minority group
that is the most educated, has the highest per-capita income, and, most important, is one of the most charitable in America.  There
are a number of reasons for Indian Americans' success in the United States.  But mostly, we're just good at being Americans.  And that
says as much about America as it does about us.
 - pp. 234-235.

Americans are passionate.  We say what we think and we are strong-willed.  That will always be one of our strengths.  But at some point
we need to take a breath.  We need to remind each other that we have more in common than we have differences.  We need to look at the
person who disagrees with us and not see that person as evil but as someone who is a mother, a daughter, a wife, a friend and an
American.
 - p. 247.

