
Notes and quotes from Minority Leader, How to Lead From the Outisde and Make Real Change by Stacey Abrams, 2018.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Introduction
Our parents also taught us to learn for the sake of knowledge itself, and they made certain we understood no one could
take knowledge from us.  Circumstances could steal your house, your job, your car, but no one could take the content of
our minds.  With learning, they believed, we could always find a way.  And proof of our knowledge -- a college degree --
would be a tangible reminder to those who doubted us because of our skin color.
 - p. xvi.

Chapter 1 - Dare to Want More - pp. 1-28
We dreamed of more, while our parents' lives centered around survival and making it from paycheck to paycheck.
Instinctively, we understood that more had to be possible, even if we didn't know what to do to get there. These
imaginings -- these desires -- are at the root of ambition.
 - p. 3.

Whether the dream is to run a company, run for office, or run a 5K -- or even if your dream has not yet been
discovered -- the path to realizing ambition is the same: [page break]
1. What do I want?
2. Why do I want it?
3. How do I get there?
 - pp. 6-7.

Knowing what lights you up and embracing what you daydream about are the first steps.
What comes next to turn ambition into ation is understanding the why.  When you understand the roots of your dreams,
you will have deeper insight into why you want what you want.
 - p. 15.

I saw firthand how government, though an imperfect tool, provided a way for an introvert like me to raise my voice and act.
 - p. 21.

It starts in college when we're told to pick a major.  Or think about the suspicion we feel when an actor announces a
Christmas album or a politician writes a romance novel.  "Jack of all trades, master of none" is the unkindest cut.
 - p. 24.

When you decide what you want and why you want it, take action immediately.  Do not wait for an invitation to act....
If you can walk away for days, weeks, or years at a time, it is not an ambition -- it's a wish.
 - p. 25.

Chapter 2 - Fear and Otherness - pp. 29-52
My responsibility, our responsibility as minority leaders, is to demonstrate to those in power the value in our difference.
Minority leaders work to challenge conventional expectations without burying personal identity and cultural distinctiveness.
 - p. 38.

Chapter 3 - Hacking and Owning Opportunity - pp. 53-78
For those of us who do not have strong backers in upper echelons of power, unusual allies can be nearly as useful for
identifying opportunities and navigating our way to progress.
One key approach is to cultivate relationships with those who have information and are typically ignored.  For example, I
am always genuinely engaged with support staff wherever I work.  First, because these women and men too often work thankless
jobs for demanding bosses and deserve our courtesy.  Second, because they may be the only other minorities in place, and it's
nice to see a friendly face that looks like mine.  Third, as I later learned due to points 1 and 2, it's the support staff
who hears everything.
 - p. 68.

I recently had lunch with a former head of diversity for a Fortune 500 company, seeking her support for my gubernatorial
campaign.  Before a few months prior, I'd never heard of Johnnie Booker.  Having been connected by a mutual friend, we sat
down at a table overlooking the Atlanta skyline, and I asked her about her path to her powerful role at the company.  She
gave me a sly smile, explaining she had taken a very circuitous route from her [page break] beginnings in rural Georgia,
in a tiny rail-stop town....  Her secret, Johnnie told me, had been the secretaries and custodians in the offices where she
built her empires.  They would pass along memos left lying about, share serets overheard in open corridors by men emptying
the trash.  With their intel, she carved out a space in the organization where she commanded millions of dollars -- more than
any person of color in her area -- and created a program that lasted through multiple regime changes.  She also had an early
warning system to let her know when the men in her organization became rankled by her success.
 - pp. 68-69.

Johnnie understood the power of the invisible workers, those whose knowledge may sometimes exceed that of the boss with the
massive paycheck.  To do their work, support staff must invariably learn the contours of their managers' jobs.
 - p. 69.

Too many of us, paradoxically, use the illusion of humbleness to keep ourselves down.  The truth is that what we may think
of as humility often disguises an ambarrassment about ambition and a lack of self-confidence.
 - p. 71.

Chapter 4 - The Myth of Mentors - pp. 79-102
Yet, if asked who my mentors are, I do not automatically name Laurette.  Not because she wasn't instrumental in saving my
career, but because she's not who we are taught to see as mentors.  In the law department heirarchy, I ranked higher than she.
 - p. 82.

Too often the idea of a mentor is a self-limiting device that has most of us hunting for someone we'll never find because of
access or because our chosen guide already has a waiting list.  Particularly if our target is the one woman who made it to the
C-suite or the person of color who achieved success in our field, the reality is we're not the first to ask for help.  By
narrowing our sense of what a mentor can be, we ignore those who are all around, ready to help us hone our skills and build
our relationship capacity.
 - p. 82.

My Myers-Briggs type is INTJ, and I sit fairly equally in the four color quadrants with blue overtones.  For communication
styles, I am "high-touch" rather than more personally engaging, which means I forget to ask about your day but will go out of
my way to figure out the system for arranging your carpool.  We can argue the value of these analyses, but they tend to offer
a fairly good overview of how we can be perceived by others.  Aloof or overly sociable?  Trustworthy but flighty?  Well
intentioned but unreliable?  Self-awareness creates space for actually connecting with others in an authentic and sustainable
manner.
 - p. 83.

In your network, be certain to have an adviser who does not look like you, sound like you, or have your same experience.  A
good adviser should offer a contrasting view because of gender differences, racial differences, socioeconomic background, and
so on.  We get stuck in our own heads, and an adviser who offers a starkly divergent personal history can sometimes illuminate
what we miss in our own experiences.
 - p. 94.

Chapter 5 - Money Matters - pp. 103-130
The takeaway: the difficulty of catching up and moving forward isn't all in your head.  Systemic biases, legacy barriers, and
current explosions of inequality conspire constantly to undermine wealth generation among minorities, especially women in
these communities.  But, as with all obstacles, our obligation is to acknowledge they exist and then fight lke hell to subvert
and circumvent them.
The most valuable tool in our arsenals will invariably be self-awareness and honest assessments of our mistakes and future
stumbles, coupled with an understanding of the barriers in our way.  To get ahead of the problem, explore your [page break]
personal relationship with money and the explicit and silent claims made on your resources.
 - pp. 116-117.

During my freshman year of college, I found myself in a battle with the financial aid office, struggling to meet costs, only
to learn of a proposed tuition hike.  On my way back to my dorm, I saw a flier directing members of the board of trustees to
their meeting location....  [page break]
I knocked on the massive mahogany doors....  I screwed up my courage and requested to attend the meeting....
I had never attended a board meeting before, and I only vaguely understood their role....
I was just in time for a discussion of the school's finances.
 - pp. 117-118.

If you are ready to put your name in the hat for a larger opportunity, check out BoardnetUSA.org, VolunteerMatch.org, or
Idealist.org .  And when you are selected, ask to serve on the audit committee or the finance committee, whether you're well-
versed or not.  The best way to learn is experience, and by serving in these roles, you have an insider's seat to how decisions
are made.
 - p. 120.

Jocelyn had a spark, but she allowed another's disbelief to quash her ambition.  Meekness, then, is not entirely the fault of
those in power.  For too many, the tendency to fall in line comes easily and becomes internalized.  We have all sat in meetings
and refused to speak up.  Why?  Probably because we didn't know everything about the topic.
 - p. 136.

Chapter 6 - Prepare to Win and Embrace the Fail - pp. 131-150
The Best Way to Be Wrong - section title
If you are going to make any decisions, take any leadership actions at all, live a fulfilling life, then you are going to be
wrong.  The goal then is the ability to admit that you have done so and use that information to move forward.  Knowing how to
be wrong is fundamentally about honing the ability to admit that you don't know.  Effective leaders are able to say to the
person they want to impress the most: "I don't know."
 - p. 145.

Thus, I work hard to remind myself that the point of daily life, of learning and taking action, is to gain more knowledge.
 - p. 145.

Chapter 7 - Making What You Have Work - pp. 151-174
While the self-help and business books are rife with discussions of leadership, the bald conversation of gaining power --
especially for those who rarely hold it -- is unusual.  As a result, too often, we in the minority miss opportunities because
we don't know what we're looking at or looking for.
 - p. 154.

No one likes to be taken for granted or taken advantage of, but both happen in organizations -- corporate, public, or nonprofit.
The opportunity for command may come in the form of overwork, sloughed onto your plate by a lazier boss.  Or when tasks come
along that no one wants to tackle, the means to become a micro-boss shouldn't be ignored.
 - p. 164.

Chapter 8 - Work-Life Jenga - pp. 175-198
Our priorities should ideally engage heart and head.  I am grateful I rarely have held a post where I had to choose one over
the other.  Whether it's a personal relationship or a professional activity, the goal is to care about what you do and have
it stimulate your mind.  Since balance is a myth, we have to decide for ourselves which way the scales tip.  I tend toward
head more than heart....
 - p. 183.

First things first also requires us to prioritize our time.  President Dwight Eisenhower is credited with inventing a system
I've found useful in managing time and people.  He distinguished between important and urgent and looked for interplay between
the two.  Urgency speaks to how time-sensitive an issue may be.  Importance categorizes how much of an impact the action can
have.  The most critical priorities should be both urgent and [page break] important -- time-sensitive anc change-making....
With apologies to President Eisenhower, I go with *Gotta Do,* *Need to Do,* *Oughta Do,* and *Might Get Around To.*
 - pp. 183-184.

I wholly understand the trepidation some of us have when it comes to relaxation (I feel it too).  It's like we're speeding
ahead and being told to tap the brakes.  Instead, consider self-care a pit stop on the racetrack.  We all need tune-ups --
physical, mental, and emotional.
 - p. 194.

Chapter 9 - Taking Power - pp. 199-208
There's a colloquialism I've embraced: let your haters be your motivators.
 - p. 205.

I'm not allowed to read the comment section of our local newspaper online and my team steers me away from Facebook other than
[page break] official posts.  Occasionally, I let my curiosity get the better of me, but I have realized that never leans to
my benefit.
 - pp. 205-206.

