
Quotes and notes from A Time for Truth, Reigniting the Promise of America, by Ted Cruz, 2015.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Dedication:]
This book is dedicated to my parents ....
It is dedicated to my wife Heidi ....
And it is dedicated to truth-tellers and freedom fighters, to the grassroots and the courageous conservatives whose passion and leadership are turning our great nation around.

[Introduction: Mendacity]
One of the saddest aspects of Washington is that when you stand for principle, and actually seem
to mean it, the typical response is "What are you **really** up to?"  Almost nobody just tells the
truth in Washington.  There's always an ulterior motive.  You're trying to raise money.  You're
building an email list.  preening for the cameras.  You're running for president.  Anything other
than that you're doing what your doing because you believe in every fiber of your being it's the
right thing.
 - p. xv.

The biggest divide in politics is not between the tea party and the establishment.  It is not even
between Republicans and Democrats.  The biggest divide is between career politicians - in both
parties - and the American people.
 - p. xxv.

[I believe this is an over-generalization, but it is quite interesting nonetheless.]
The more I studied free-market economics and the Constitution, the more obvious it became to me
that there is a systemic imbalance in our political discourse.  On the left, for the advocates of
government power and statism, the best and the brightest are consistently attracted to the organs
for the transmission of ideas, namely politics, journalism, entertainment, or academia.  In that
respect, Barack Obama is the epitome of the perfect leftist.
On the right, however, for those who believe in free markets and individual liberty, the best and
the brightest tend to go make money.  They go to the business world, rather than fight in the
political arena.
 - p. 39.

Bush's conservativism was a different sort from that of, say, Ronald Reagan.  Reagan had spent a
lot of years thinking about first principles, reading Milton Friedman and free-market economists.
He was someone who addressed public policy issues from his core positions and reasoned from
there.
Bush's was a sort of gut conservatism shared by a lot of small business owners in West Texas.
Although he was bright and asked incisive questions, he didn't tend to reason from abstract
principles.
 - p. 107.

My tenure [as solicitor general of Texas] also brought into sharp relief the growing divide between
Republicans in Washington and conservatives everywhere else in America.  An increasing number of
Americans, especially in the bourgeoning tea party movement, could not understand how the people
we'd elected to office to articulate and defend conservative principles seemed instead to be drawn
in, becoming more and more part of the problem.
 - p. 173.

[On page 202 he describes how he used populist tactics learned from Barack Obama's race against
Hillary Clinton in 2008 in his run for Senate in 2012 against Lieutenant Governor of Texas David
Dewhurst, the establishment favorite.]
Indeed, I bought copies of Obama campaign strategist David Plouffe's book, The Audacity to Win, and
gave it to our senior team.
 - p. 202.

With pugnaciousness and grit - his major issue was the federal debt - the five-foot-five, silver-haired
Perot had managed a Herculean feat: He was running neck-and-neck and in some instances leading national
polls for the presidency of the United States against two seasoned political veterans.
 - p. 220.

Typically, I like to call people a friend when they've been, actually, a friend.  But in Washington
everyone is labeled a "friend," especially when you're about to put a shiv in his or her back.
 - p. 225.

For many years, Democrats had prided themselves on their defense of civil liberties, and yet some of
the saddest realities of the modern Senate is that today's Senate Democrats are for more concerned about
standing with their political allies in the White House than they are with defending the Bill of Rights.
 - p. 244.

All of us remember President Obama looking at the television camera and saying, "If you like your health
insurance plan, you can keep it.  If you like your doctor, you can keep your doctor.  Period."
The promise provided just enough political cover for Democratic legislators with moderate or conservative
constituencies - like Arkansas and Louisiana - to vote for Obamacare.  It was a promise that Obama repeated
twenty-eight times while looking directly at the television cameras.  And it was a promise that was flatly
and unambiguously false.  Indeed, it was in direct conflict with Obamacare's purpose and plain text, which
said that millions of preexisting policies were going to be illegal.
 - p. 267.

[Chapter 10, entitled Obama's Vacuum of Leadership, excoriates Barack Obama, at one point stating that he
and the Democrats in Congress tried to subvert the first amendment's protections of freedom of expression
and flat-out censor movies such as those like Hillary: The Movie, which is mentioned on p. 314.]

